{
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "2004-07-09T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/07/p6pdigest/20040704.html",
   "title" : "This Week on Perl 6, Week Ending 2004-07-04",
   "tags" : [
      "internals",
      "parrot",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "description" : " Another week, another Perl 6 Summary. This is becoming a habit. Let's do perl6-internals first, shall we? Japhy's Perl 6 Rules Parser Last week Jeff 'Japhy' Pinyan announced that he'd be working on a Perl 6 rules parser once...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





Another week, another Perl 6 Summary. This is becoming a habit.

Let's do perl6-internals first, shall we?

#### [Japhy's Perl 6 Rules Parser]{#Japhy's_Perl_6_rules_parser}

Last week Jeff 'Japhy' Pinyan announced that he'd be working on a Perl 6
rules parser once he'd finished his Perl 5 regex parser. This week saw a
deal of discussion on how his parser worked. The answer seemed to be,
"It works the Right Way." Which is good. With any luck Steve Fink will
be able to get this parser and the current (sketchy) Perl 6 compiler
playing well together.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0406262313030.28219-100000@perlmonk.org>

#### [Complexities]{#Complexities}

Last week Leo pointed out that we'd need support for complex numbers in
order to get the Piethon stuff running properly. This week there was
some discussion of what was actually needed.

Later in the week Ion Alexandru Morega posted a patch implementing them.
I think Leo spoke for us all when he said, "Whee, great, thanks --
applied."

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040627215622.37698.qmail@onion.perl.org>

#### [New Mailing Lists]{#New_mailing_lists}

There was some discussion of how perl6-internals should be broken up. It
looks like we'll see new lists called parrot-internals,
parrot-compilers, and parrot-library (for internals hackers, compiler
implementers, and library builders respectively). The original
perl6-internals will carry on, but will be focused on the actual
internals of Perl 6.

Some, or all, of these lists will be covered in these summaries for as
long as I can keep up.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Pine.LNX.4.58.0406280851280.16872@sprite.sidhe.org>

#### [Stack Language for Parrot]{#Stack_language_for_Parrot}

In as impressive a delurk as I've seen in some time, Michael Pelletier
announced that he'd been lurking for a while, playing with Parrot, and
had implemented a little stack language not entirely unrelated to Forth,
which he'd christened Parakeet. He posted his implementation and got
promptly Warnocked.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1088570711.2678.648.camel@heinlein>

#### [GMP and Licensing Issues]{#GMP_and_licensing_issues}

Scott Bronson announced that he'd taken a look at GMP's license and he
didn't think it was incompatible with Parrot's licenses. Dan wasn't
convinced. Scott's still trying to convince him though.

Robert Spier attempted to resolve the problem by pointing everyone at
another possibly suitable library called IMath.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=1088572790.3306.100.camel@lea.rinspin.com>

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=m3wu1o8cb1.wl_rspier@pobox.com>

### [Meanwhile, in perl6-language]{#Meanwhile,_in_perl6-language}

#### [Argh! Strings!]{#Argh!_Strings!}

Discussion of the various ways of slicing and dicing strings in Perl 6
continued. The issue is that, especially in a Unicode world, there are
many ways of looking at a string, all of which are useful in different
contexts. However, because you can look at a string as a sequence of
bytes, code points, graphemes, or whatever, then functions like `substr`
get a little weird. If you were to say:

        $substring = $a_string, 5

Then what does the '5' mean?

And that's just one example of where conceptual problems can arise.

I confess that, whenever Unicode comes up, my gut reaction is to keep my
head down and trust that Larry's going to get it right. Certainly the
current formulation seems decently sane; things only get problematic if
you're trying to do something well out of the ordinary.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040626202059.GA1747@wall.org>

#### [`if`, `loop`, and Lexical Scope]{#if,_loop,_and_lexical_scope}

Discussion of Perl 6's new scoping rules (things are generally more
consistent than they are in Perl 5; if a variable is declared inside a
block, or in that block's signature in the case of `->    $a, $b {...}`
type blocks, then that block is its scope) continued. Some people like
the new rules, others don't.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040627211611.GB3013@babylonia.flatirons.org>

#### [Different OO Models]{#Different_OO_models}

Jonadab the Unsightly One had wondered about having objects inheriting
behavior from objects rather than classes in Perl 6. The gist of the
answers he received was that it wouldn't be in the core of the language,
but neither should it be too hard to implement something that worked how
he wants.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=n02nraxl.fsf@jonadab.homeip.net>

#### [Undo?]{#Undo?}

Michele Dondi wondered if Perl 6 would have a built-in `undo` function
for rolling back the history of a scalar (say). Rafael Garcia-Suarez
pointed out that the concept wasn't as simple as it first appeared,
especially in the context of threads, closures, side effects. He
suggested that a better approach would be to implement a suitable
transaction/rollback library that handled such things in an
application-appropriate fashion rather than using a "half-baked kludge
built into the base language." Mark Biggar pointed out that the language
already had hypothetical values, which did pretty much the right thing.

Elsewhere in the thread, Luke Palmer attempted to explain continuations
again. A sandwich was involved.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=Pine.LNX.4.56L0.0406291740180.10615@worf.pcteor1.mi.infn.it>

Luke makes a continuation sandwich --\
<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=20040629233129.GA3979@babylonia.flatirons.org>

#### [If Not `,` Then What?]{#If_not_,_then_what}

Alexey Trofimenko triggered your Summarizer's sense of *déjà vu* when he
asked what was happening to the C-style comma (we're keeping it, more or
less) and proposing a `then` keyword for use in the contexts where Perl
6's new `,` didn't quite work the same way as in Perl 5. Which is pretty
much the same as the proposal Luke Palmer made some months ago and which
Larry rejected.

Jonathan Lang pointed out how you'd implement `then` if you needed it,
though.

The thread got slightly silly after this (Sideways semicolons! I ask
you!). I'm not sure what chromatic was driving at when he suggested a
`meh` operator, though.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=opsafpwqtgsspxk8@s>

#### [`map`, `grep` and Laziness]{#map,_grep_and_laziness}

That man Alexey also had some questions about lazy evaluation. Luke
Palmer attempted to allay his fears by saying that Perl 6 would be
essentially lazy unless you told it otherwise.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?selm=opsajn0im2sspxk8@s>

### [Announcements, Apologies, Acknowledgements]{#Announcements,_Apologies,_Acknowledgements}

Woohoo! Another weekly summary.

If you find these summaries useful or enjoyable, please consider
contributing to the Perl Foundation to help support the development of
Perl. You might also like to send me feedback at
[mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk](mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk)

<http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> -- The Perl Foundation

<http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> -- Perl 6 Development site


