{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2004/11/04/komodo3",
   "date" : "2004-11-04T00:00:00-08:00",
   "tags" : [
      "activestate",
      "jason-purdy",
      "komodo",
      "komodo-3-0",
      "perl-ide",
      "product-reviews"
   ],
   "description" : "There are several different types of programmers, but I would wager that the vast majority are just like me: their mouse is a crucial input extension, and having an environment that supports the task at hand makes coding easier and,...",
   "categories" : "Tooling",
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2004_11_04_komodo3/111-komodo.gif",
   "title" : "Komodo 3.0 Review",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "jason-purdy"
   ]
}





There are several different types of programmers, but I would wager that
the vast majority are just like me: their mouse is a crucial input
extension, and having an environment that supports the task at hand
makes coding easier and, dare I say, more fun. This is where a GUI IDE
(Integrated Development Environment) can help, with syntax highlighting,
project management, code completion, reference documentation, support
tools, and being able to use your mouse to place your cursor or to
select a particular segment of code.

I'm a GUI IDE kind of guy, and I've been through quite a few of them to
find the one that best suits me as a Perl Web Developer. ActiveState's
[Komodo](http://www.activestate.com/Products/Komodo) (version 3.0.1)
fits the bill, though there remains room for improvement. Let's start
with the positive, and then I'll address where Komodo can improve.

### Pluses

The last time that [Perl.com reviewed
Komodo](/pub/a/2002/10/09/komodo.html) was October 2002. At that time,
Komodo was at version 2.0, which was slow and whose functionality seemed
only halfway implemented. It showed promise then and has made huge leaps
in subsequent versions to overcome the major failings, with speed
increases, functionality improvements, and adding even more features.

My first criteria for any editor is (accurate) syntax highlighting. All
editors have this to some extent, but when you throw some wacky Perl
stuff their way (heredocs, for example), they start to choke and mislead
you. Komodo has handled everything I've thrown at it flawlessly and has
a neat preferences panel where you can customize the color scheme with
your own flair (or some might say lack thereof when they see my screen).

Another important feature for an IDE is project management, a way to
group a list of files relevant to the project you're working on in an
easy-to-access fashion. Komodo has a Projects tab, through which you can
do pretty much anything in that regard; it even includes a powerful
Import from File System that'll help you set up a project in no time.
Also, within that same tab is a Code Explorer, which will parse and
index the open file for subroutines

Simon referred to Komodo's Toolbox in the previous review, and that's
certainly been a great feature for me. I've setup some tools, such as
PerlTidy, to run on an open file. Then, when I open a messy file, I can
just double-click on that tool, and it'll clean up the file. I also have
other tools to insert standard snippets of HTML and HTML::Template code.
Snippets are really cool because you can set the cursor placement after
you've inserted the snippet, as well as maintain the indentation styles.
You can also assign Key Bindings to pretty much anything, including the
tools. When I hit Ctrl-1, the editor will insert this:

    <!-- TMPL_VAR NAME="" -->

into my code and put the cursor right there in the `NAME` parameter, so
I can keep typing. I've included some instructions after the review
below to show you how to set these up.

Simon also referred to the Rx Toolkit, which is still available and
great to use to play around with regular expressions and figure out how
they will work. Version 3.0 brings vast improvements to the Rx Toolkit,
with different modes for Match, Match All (for multiline text to match
against), Split, and Replace/Replace All. This tool is indispensable for
those who are tinkering with a regular expression and trying to figure
things out. ActiveState went a step further and added a Perl Interactive
Shell that allows you to type or paste in lines of code and play around.
This has been useful for me when figuring out data structures and how to
access deeply-nested data.

Komodo also supports CVS \[and Perforce (version control)\], such that
within the IDE, you can perform versioning functionality (diff, commit,
checkout, etc). It will also monitor the files and repository so that if
there are any changes, the files' indicator will change accordingly,
keeping you aware of what's going on. You can also setup the CVS
remotely over SSH to interact with a remote repository securely.

I feel like I've barely scratched the surface with what Komodo can do,
both in this review as well as my personal experience with the IDE.
Komodo has a powerful debugger, which in an IDE setting is a great way
to visualize your code executing, with the line of code in one window
and a tab with call stacks, output, watched variables (that you can
change midstream if you like), breakpoints, and more. Komodo presents
complex watched variables in a nested tree format, allowing you to
expand elements of hashes and arrays to go through the data. Komodo also
supports remote debugging, allowing you to debug a remote console script
or web application right inside Komodo, stepping in and out of code and
watching variables right off the remote server. Personally, I could
never make this work (despite ActiveState Technical Support's best
efforts), but I haven't had the need for it in the first place.

Komodo also supports different languages besides Perl, such as HTML,
PHP, Python, and XML (including syntax highlighting support for 30 other
languages). I do dabble in PHP from time to time, so Komodo gives me a
one-stop IDE to handle that, too. I can also incorporate all of these
file types into one project for easy access.

Just as the power of Perl comes from its community, ActiveState also
extends a sense of community with Komodo, with
[ASPN](http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN), a portal of sorts that
encompasses mailing lists, documentation, cookbooks (code recipes), and
a bugzilla. With an ActivePerl Pro Studio subscription, ASPN also
integrates with Safari, such that you can search and read over 1,000
technical books from O'Reilly, Addison Wesley, and other publishers.

Komodo installs a ton of helpful documentation and tutorials locally.
You can easily pull up the documentation for a specific function/module
by highlighting it and hitting Shift-F1 (which does a Google search on
perldoc.com for the highlighted string) or Ctrl-F1 (which does a Google
search on any site for the highlighted string). Komodo also comes with
some sample tools in the Toolbox (that you could bind to another key
combination) to run `perldoc` locally on the highlighted function or
module.

ActiveState is also working on a new point release that will bring
AutoComplete and CallTips to the Perl language, which will provide even
more efficiency to coding and reference documentation. This next release
will also address a few bugs (some of which I address below) and
reinforces their dedication to responding to our feedback and pushing
for even more functionality.

### Minuses

Komodo 3.0 has a few hiccups and flaws, though. It seems the winds of
version control have shifted to something called Subversion. The IDE
doesn't directly support it, though you could certainly create
supporting tools in the Toolbox. As I said earlier, I also had problems
with Remote Debugging, though it was never a high-enough priority for me
to figure out what was going on. Komodo also allows you to access files
through FTP, but not SCP/SSH, which is more secure and becoming the
standard for accessing remote files.

Also, when Komodo went from 2.5.2 to 3.0, they moved the Toolbox from a
tab in the Projects Tab to a tab of its own, which kind of annoys me
because it eats into my precious screen real estate. It would be nice to
be able to customize the placements of the various tabs and what they
contain. Komodo also doesn't support code descriptions in the Code
Browser for Perl (they do for PHP and Python), though that may change,
hopefully with the next release.

Lastly, there seem to be quite a few minor GUI flaws. There's nothing
major to prevent you from doing your work; the flaws are things like
double-clicking on a subroutine name in the Code Browser goes to the
line, but in a huge Perl file, it doesn't center on the screen (you may
have to scroll a bit) and more seldom, doesn't go to the right line (the
start of the subroutine). I also had a problem with copy and pasting
stuff in a line-wrapped code that would then appear as if I have lost
code. Reflowing the paragraphs sometimes doesn't work (it would reflow
more narrowly than it should have). When I ran the PerlTidy tool on my
open file, I wouldn't see the "File Changed on Disk" alert until I
Alt-Tabbed to another application and then Alt-Tabbed back.

### Conclusion

The great thing about ActiveState is that their developers and technical
support use their mailing lists and a Bugzilla to interact with the
feedback and to track down these types of flaws and address them.

At the risk of sounding like a fanboy, ActiveState's Komodo is an
amazing platform, surrounding you with the power to accomplish any Perl
task at hand. Despite its negative points, they aren't enough to
overcome the benefits it brings to the table, and I highly recommend it
for Perl programmers of any variety. Komodo is available for Windows,
Linux, and Solaris. Prices start at \$29.95 for the personal edition
(non-commercial/educational use) and \$295 for the professional edition.
Subscriptions, upgrade pricing, and a free 21-day fully-functional
edition are also available off of their web site.

### Toolbox Setup Instructions

To setup PerlTidy:

1.  Make sure you have Perl and PerlTidy installed. For Windows, grab
    the ActivePerl distribution from ActiveState and then download and
    install the [PerlTidy](http://perltidy.sourceforge.net/) script from
    SourceForge.
2.  In your toolbox tab, click the Add Item button at the top; then
    select New Command.
3.  The cursor starts off in the Command line, which you can specify as:

        perl c:\path\to\perltidy -b [perltidy style prefs] %f

    *(`-b` specifies to tidy the file in place, making a *.bak* backup
    file.)*

4.  In the advanced section, put `%D` in the Start field to launch
    PerlTidy in the script's working directory.
5.  Rename the Command to PerlTidy in the field at the top.
6.  At this point, you can also go to the Key Binding tab and assign a
    key combination to run the command.
7.  Save, open a Perl file and give it a shot, either using the key
    combination you assigned or by double clicking on the command from
    your Toolbox.

To setup a snippet, such as the HTML::Template tag:

1.  In your toolbox tab, click the Add Item button at the top, and then
    select New Snippet.
2.  Type in the text to insert when you run the snippet. In my case, I
    used:

        <!-- TMPL_VAR NAME="" ESCAPE=HTML -->

3.  Be sure to place the cursor between the quote marks and select the
    Maintain selected text or cursor position after insertion checkbox.
4.  Name the snippet (I used `tmplvar`) at the top. You can also go to
    the Key Binding tab at the top and assign a key combination to run
    the snippet.
5.  Save and then give it a shot, either using the key combination you
    assigned or by double clicking on the command from your Toolbox.


