{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/05/12/rdice.html",
   "date" : "2005-05-12T00:00:00-08:00",
   "title" : "Inside YAPC::NA 2005",
   "categories" : "Community",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-conference",
      "perl-mongers",
      "richard-dice",
      "toronto",
      "toronto-perl-mongers",
      "tpf",
      "tpm",
      "yapc",
      "yapc-na"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "chromatic"
   ],
   "description" : "An interview with Richard Dice, who helped organize Perl's YAPC::NA 2005 in Toronto.",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





*[The Perl Foundation](http://www.perlfoundation.org/) organizes and
holds several community-based Perl conferences each year. This year's
North American conference, [YAPC::NA 2005](http://yapc.org/America/) is
in Toronto, Canada, June 27-29. chromatic recently interviewed Richard
Dice, organizer of the conference this year, to discuss his plans and
experiences.*

*Can you tell our readers a little bit about yourself?*

**Richard Dice:** Richard's just this guy, see?

I'm 32, born in Montreal and grew up in the sleepy southern Ontario city
of London, Ontario. I did my undergrad degree in astronomy and applied
mathematics at the University of Western Ontario. I moved to The Big
Smoke (Toronto) in 1996 and have lived here (with brief stints in
Montreal again and in Waterloo, ON) since then. I finished my MBA at the
University of Toronto about a year ago, and I have recently started a
job as a senior IT consultant at a company in Toronto called Information
Balance. I've been married for not quite 2 years now, and we're soon to
be moving into our first house. (The day after YAPC! Ugh!)

I've been a Unix-head since 1992 and a Linux guy since 1994, which is
around the same time that I started programming in Perl, coming to it
from C. (The first Perl program I ever wrote took 45 minutes. To do the
same in C would have taken me three days. I never looked back.)

I have a love of good beer and scotch (and know *everywhere* in Toronto
to get both), overestimate my ability to speak French, have an
ever-growing personal library that my wife laments, and I go to all the
good raves in the city. (I get in to most of the after-parties, too.)

Also, I'm a cat person.

*How did you decide that not only did you want* someone *to host a YAPC
in Toronto, but that you were the one to write the proposal and organize
things?*

**RD:** I blame Damian.

Damian Conway is a professor of computer science at Monash University in
Melbourne, Australia, a Perl programmer par excellence, and an amazing
public speaker. In the latter half of 2000, Yet Another Society (also
known as The Perl Foundation) raised money to "buy" Damian for the year
2001, releasing him from his professorial duties at Monash and tasking
him in part to tour the world speaking about Perl. (The Perl 6
announcement had just recently been made at the time and it was thought
that he would make an excellent "champion" of the cause.)

In early 2001, I was in the process of moving from Montreal to Toronto
when I noticed that there was a small gap in Damian's tour schedule in
June. I had seen him the year before at YAPC 19100 in Pittsburgh and
thought he was simply amazing. I wanted to support his mission to
evangelize Perl. So I wrote him an email, introduced myself, and asked
him to come to Toronto to present a few free public talks on Perl. I
didn't want for him to say no, so in order to help make the decision
easier I told him I'd make it all expenses paid. He quickly replied to
say yes. Then, I wrote the Toronto Perl Monger (TPM) mailing list (which
had never heard of me before this) and asked for help with fundraising
to bring Damian to Toronto. It took some doing on my part, but in the
end Damian's trip was completely covered and I didn't have to back-stop
it. Not only was the trip a success financially, but everyone really
seemed to enjoy the experience. This was my introduction to the Toronto
Perl Mongers, to Damian, and to the wide world of Perl community
organization.

Just before he left Toronto, Damian suggested that I consider organizing
the same for him during his North American summer tour in 2002. How
could I say no? Only this time, with a year to plan things, I could turn
it from a small event into Damian-pooloza. Spread out over a week in
June 2002 he presented three talks, each with around 250 people in
attendance. The budget was also an order of magnitude greater than what
I raised the year before. That was when some people locally (and Damian)
started suggesting to me that I organize a YAPC in Toronto. I cringed,
because I had known the suggestion was going to be raised eventually,
and because I knew how much work it would be. But I also knew that,
again, there was no way I could say no.

In the summer of 2003 I organized TPM to put together a bid for YAPC::NA
2004, which lost to the Buffalo bid (as judged by The Perl Foundation).
And I'm glad that it did! The Buffalo team did a great job, and it just
spurred us on to try even harder for our 2005 bid, which we won.

*You offered to fund Damian's trip to Toronto without having things
lined up first?*

**RD:** That's correct. People are often surprised when I mention this
aspect of things.

*Is that confidence or something else?*

**RD:** Some of it is confidence, but only part of it would be
confidence in myself. (Though certainly I've been accused of this more
than once.) The other part is confidence in the Perl community, its
generosity and its ability to recognize when something good (e.g. a
Damian Conway series of talks) is about to happen.

When I first hatched the scheme to bring Damian to Toronto in my head, I
realized that it had all the makings for an organizational race
condition. That is, if I went to Damian telling him that we would like
him to come to Toronto conditional on funding being found, then he'd say
"Great! Get back to me when you've got the funding and I'll make my
plans." And then I'd turn to the Toronto Perl community to ask for
funding to bring Damian to Toronto, and the reply I'd get would be "I'd
love to donate! Tell me when Damian is confirmed and I'll contribute
something." That's the kind of situation that just eats planning time
away until it's all gone. To break this vicious cycle before it even
started I decided to guarantee the funds myself. It worked. There were
risks, but the potential rewards were too great not to make the effort.

*I remember Damian lobbying for the Toronto bid for 2004. Obviously your
approach worked.*

**RD:** I assure you that no kick-back schemes were involved. :-)

I think that whatever support Damian showed for Toronto would have come
from his experience in seeing us "pull out all the stops" when we
invited him to Toronto in the past. I guess he had confidence in us to
do the same, but for hundreds of people this time and not just him.

*What's the process of putting together the budget like? I'm not looking
for specific details and secrets, just some idea of what goes into
organizing a conference.*

**RD:** The budget is everything. The Perl Foundation isn't some huge
organization with bottomless pits of money--YAPC has to stand on its
own, financially at least. I never allowed myself to plan a budget where
I wasn't 99.9% sure that no losses would occur. On the other hand, I
didn't want to have a conference that was so skimpy on goodies that
people would be talking to each other years from now saying things like,
"Remember YAPC in Toronto? That just sucked!"

This made for a rather iterative process. The conference budget was
designed "modularly", so as I identified more funding I could add on to
the conference. The original budgetary pass at the conference did look
pretty sucky. It wouldn't lose any money, but it would only barely make
the YAPC grade, too. So then the effort shifted over to finding
corporate sponsorships. This was a lot of hard work, but it has been
entirely worthwhile. We have had a lot of excellent people and companies
support the conference well beyond the call of duty. (Please visit the
sponsors page on the YAPC::NA web site to see what I mean and who I'm
talking about.)

The other main point regarding the budgetary process is that I didn't do
it alone. Eric Bower, one of the Toronto Mongers, stepped forward to
create the budgetary spreadsheet models that he and I consulted (and
still consult) regularly. The latest iteration of this process has so
many smarts built in to it that I wonder sometimes if I could just step
away from planning the conference from here on in and let the
spreadsheet take care of things by itself. :-)

*In the past couple of years, I've heard that there's more collaboration
between YAPC organizers than before. (Jeff Bisbee talked about this
quite a bit after the YAPC::2003 in Florida.) Is there a community of
burned-out ex-organizers that still work together?*

**RD:** The first rule of YAPC ex-organizer club is you do not talk
about YAPC ex-organizer club.

Seeing as how I just broke the first rule, I may as well spill the beans
entirely.

The majority of the contact I have with the ex-organizers is with Kevin
Meltzer (YAPC:NA 2003 in Boca Raton, FL, alongside Jeff Bisbee) and Jim
Brandt (YAPC::NA 2004 in Buffalo). Jeff and Kevin glommed themselves
onto The Perl Foundation to act as the core of the Conferences
Committee, and Jim is just a generally accessible nice guy who can't
hide from me, as I've got him on AIM. I've had a few emails with Sarah
Burcham (YAPC::NA 2002 in St. Louis) and Rich Lafferty (YAPC::NA 2001 in
Montreal) but nothing major.

In addition to the YAPC organizers of previous years, I have been in a
great deal of contact with Allison Randal, president of The Perl
Foundation, and Kurt DeMaagd, treasurer and general "boy Friday" of The
Perl Foundation. He's the unsung hero in all of this as far as I can
tell.

Truth be told, even if the previous YAPC organizers were incredibly
tight and available to me, I'm not sure what I would be able to do with
the "wisdom of the past" they could offer. They might be able to give me
a sense of what needs to be accomplished and by what T-minus-YAPC date,
and maybe they could give me some leads in terms of corporate
sponsorship, but these things really aren't the bottleneck. The early
bottleneck for the conference this year has been money and making a
budget for the conference that works. Doing that took so much time that
things we would have liked to do sooner had to wait too long for my
liking. (For example, opening up attendee registration.) The current
bottleneck is finding people who can look after task implementation
details on the ground here in Toronto. For that, I work with my local
TPM members.

*How does organizing a conference compare to organizing a software
project?*

**RD:** That's a really interesting question. I hadn't considered this
before, but I can posit a few possibilities.

First, I want to make a distinction between types of software projects:
commercial and open source. I think these two types have quite different
organizational characteristics. Organizing a YAPC is more like
organizing an open source software project, but it has elements of
commercial organization, too.

The open source software aspect of YAPC organizing is that everyone
involved is a volunteer. I can only get people to move in the needed
direction by setting an example, moral suasion, persuasion, and by being
the obvious best person to make decisions and lead the group. That said,
I can't make anybody do anything they don't want to. Even if I was
ostensibly "successful" in talking someone into something they were
reluctant to do, the end result is that they wouldn't put in enough time
and wouldn't do a good enough job. I have to be very sensitive to
finding the right people to do the right things.

Fortunately, it's not like I'm trying to make an organization that sells
widgets. I'm running a YAPC, which is an intrinsically interesting and
exciting thing. There are lots of people in TPM who want to help out and
are willing to put in entirely unreasonable amounts of time and effort
to make it a great conference. What I have to do is provide a structure
in which they can be effective, and in which they can feel like they're
being effective. I'm very grateful to all the people in TPM who have
helped out so much so far, and I know that this help will continue (and
accelerate, even!) going from here all the way to the conference, which
should be *most excellent* as a result of all this energy and planning.
(The speakers must be commended, too; they're all volunteers who help
out YAPC as well, even if they do it in a different way.)

The commercial software project aspect of things is that YAPC has a
deadline, and it has a budget, and people are charged money to attend
(not a lot, but still it makes for a different dynamic). There is no
"release early, release often" aspect of YAPC. There is no "we'll only
release it when it's ready" aspect. These constraints drive the process.

*I've heard rumors that you have some new events planned. What's this
about a scavenger hunt? How about the hackathon beforehand?*

**RD:** You are well-connected to the rumor mill, I see.

The scavenger hunt actually originated with Kevin Meltzer. He and I were
chatting on AIM one day and he suggested it to me, seemingly out of the
blue. I guess what happened was he got interested in seeing what there
was to do in Toronto for personal touristing reasons (people often come
a few days early or stay a few days late to YAPCs in order just to see
the sights). What he found was that there was just plain too much to do
in Toronto, and he got excited about experiencing the city as a whole.
This is actually something that the TPM group wanted to accomplish in
hosting a YAPC. Toronto is one of the great urban environments of North
America (on the scale of San Francisco or Chicago) and YAPC is being
held right in the heart of downtown. We're happy and proud for an
opportunity to share the city with all the people who are coming in from
afar to visit, especially people who haven't been before.

So Kevin made the suggestion, and I thought it was a great idea. At the
next TPM meeting I mentioned it to the whole group and everyone seemed
really pleased with it. Basically, we'll divide up the conference
attendees into groups of 10 and send people out into the city with their
digicams to track down and photograph local landmarks and places of
geek-interest. This will happen on the night of Monday 27 June. The
winners will be announced...

... on Tuesday night, which will be the night of the social centerpiece
of YAPC. For those who don't know their geography (or don't happen to
have a map handy), Toronto is situated on the north shore of Lake
Ontario. Lake Ontario is one of the Great Lakes, which means it's big.
Really big. More of an inland sea than a lake. Tuesday night, we're
taking a cruise. We've booked a major cruise ship to hold the entire
conference, and for 4 hours it will navigate Toronto Harbor, the
channels through the Toronto Islands, and the near coast of Lake
Ontario. I've done this kind of cruise once before; it makes for a great
combination of natural and urban beauty. (The Toronto skyline is one of
the most impressive in the world, and it looks *great* from the lake as
day turns to night.) We're also going to be having our banquet dinner on
the cruise boat, and our fundraising auction. (There will be some
special items to be had during the auction as well. They are sure to
raise eyebrows.)

There will be happenings before the conference officially begins, too.
Uri Guttman (of Boston.pm) is the official YAPC 'socialist czar', and
he's arranging for a group restaurant dinner for anyone who arrives to
the conference on Sunday (which should be almost everyone from out of
town) and he's also trying to book a movie theatre in the downtown area
for our exclusive use to see something, we're not quite sure what yet.
(What are the big sci-fi films to be released towards the end of June?)
We're still looking for sponsorship for this.

Though neither social nor officially part of the conference, the
'lambdacamels' will descend upon Toronto, too. This is the group led by
Autrijus Tang, founder of the Pugs project. Pugs is an effort to
implement Perl 6 in Haskell as a kind of proof-of-concept for the real
Perl 6 (which will run on Parrot), as well as to give Larry a working
Perl 6 example through which he can focus on the details in the Perl 6
language design. About a dozen Pugs hackers will show up in Toronto
nearly a week before the conference happens, and then be whisked away to
a wilderness hideaway where they will do nothing but hack on Pugs for
several days before the conference starts. (We have a lot of wilderness
in Canada, even near Toronto, and one of the Toronto Mongers has a large
cottage where he'll house the whole gang.)

From time to time we will throw them scraps of food. If we are pleased
with the results, we'll drive them back to civilization in time for the
conference.

*How did you go about wrangling sponsors?*

**RD:** I'd say it was a three-edged sword.

*Yours, mine, and the truth?*

**RD:** You do not understand, but you will.

All 3 edges have something to do with simply being networked into
various IT communities. The least of the 3 was me needing sponsors and
flipping through my Rolodex. (Well, Palm Pilot, but same idea.) The
first--and crucial--sponsor came as a result of my being active in CLUE,
the Canadian Linux Users Exchange. It is an organization that attempts
to act as a clearing-house for Linux community activities around Canada.
The head of that organization, Matt Rice, is a big Perl programmer and
advocate as well. And he is also closely connected with the people at
LPI, the Linux Professional Institute.

So one day Matt and I were talking, and I told him how I was mustering
TPM to make a YAPC bid. This was in July 2004, making it the 2nd bid
that TPM would make for YAPC, as we lost the 2003 bid to Buffalo.
Buffalo did a great job, and I was happy to have lost to them after I
went to YAPC::NA 2004 there and saw the quality of their event. One of
the really big things that they had going for them was that the CompSci
department at SUNY Buffalo donated the entire venue to them, gratis.
They just had a new building built on campus and they were eager for an
opportunity to showcase it. This, plus a desire on the part of the
chairman of the CS department there to 'give back' to the open source
community in general (and the Perl community in specific) led to the
donation of their new building as a venue. It's a really nice building.
We were very fortunate to have had it for the conference.

*Did this happen before TPF accepted the proposal or after?*

**RD:** It was part of the 2004 bid that Buffalo.pm submitted to TPF in
August 2003. As a member of the Perl community, I was really happy with
the donation from the CS department there and how it made for a great
YAPC. As a losing bidder for YAPC::NA 2004, though, I felt differently.
(Like I said, I'm glad that they did \[win\]. You can't look that kind
of gift horse in the mouth.)

I felt like I had a trump card played against me. We put a lot into our
2004 bid, and yet there was no argument I could make that would have
changed the outcome, or *should have changed the outcome*.

So I felt vulnerable when it came to creating a bid in the summer of
2004 for 2005. Like, no matter how hard I worked, someone else could
produce the same magical trump and we would be shut out. So I made
finding that same trump card myself to put into the Toronto bid my first
order of business. I explained it this way to Matt, and he brought it to
some people at LPI, and they realized the value of supporting a great
open source community like the Perl community, and they essentially
committed to a sponsorship large enough that our venue requirements
would be covered.

So LPI became the foundation sponsor of YAPC::NA 2005 in Toronto. I
honestly can't imagine how I would have made the conference work without
them.

*How much of the previous bid did you re-use?*

**RD:** Much of it. We cleaned it up a bit, and added "options" to it.
In the previous year I identified one potential venue to put into the
bid. For the 2005 bid, I kept that one but added another, in case TPF
found one or the other preferable. But the main addition to the bid was
the LPI sponsorship. To compare the work effort of the two bids, I'd say
that the bid we put together in the summer of 2003 took about a dozen of
us about 2.5 weeks to put together, in our off-hours, using a Kwiki.
(That was when I first appreciated just how useful wikis can be in
collaborative documentation development tasks!)

The bid in 2004, I assembled myself in about 2 days. (Not including the
effort of finding the LPI sponsorship or in 'scouting out' the venue
possibilities.)

*Having potential venues and a real sponsor must have helped.*

**RD:** I don't know if the 2005 bid benefited from having two venue
possibilities as opposed to one, but it certainly benefited from having
the foundational sponsorship of LPI.

*How about the rest of the sponsors?*

**RD:** So I've covered two edges of the sword. The third edge is by
random chance. Although it must be said that chance favors the prepared
mind.

In September 2004 there was a PHP conference happening in Toronto, and I
kept up a degree of correspondence with the producer of that conference,
Marco Tabini. (This was as part of the work I was doing for CLUE, which
was making myself aware of open source events happening in Canada.) The
day that conference was to wrap up, I eked some time out of work and
went over to the conference venue to congratulate Marco on his
conference. So we finally met in person there, and he invited me to stay
and join him for lunch. I did... and promptly got separated from him and
the rest of his core group in the buffet line.

So after I got my food, I went to whatever other random table appeared
to have a free seat and I got into conversation with the rest of the
table. At one point during conversation at the table one of the guys
there asked us all what we thought of DB2 (the IBM database product).
About a year earlier I had worked with it in a Perl project and I had
had a hell of a time, so I heaped a bit of good-natured scorn upon it,
mostly having to do with how difficult it was to integrate with Perl.
After a few minutes of ranting I asked him why he asked. The reason was
because he was the Product Manager for DB2 and Open Source Software at
IBM. (`$name = 'Dan Scott'`)

*Moral: ask before ranting, unless you're the kind of person who asks
and then doesn't rant.*

**RD:** Fortunately, Dan is one of those people who takes criticism
constructively! :-) He was really happy to hear that I had an opinion on
Perl and DB2, and he wanted to get together with me to get down my
thoughts in a more organized fashion, so that he could direct some
resources within IBM toward addressing those concerns. So we made an
appointment to do that. And then I mentioned to him that there was this
YAPC thing that had just recently been awarded to Toronto, and maybe IBM
would like to help out with that too. Actually, this may have been a few
days before the official announcement that Toronto.pm had been awarded
YAPC, but Kevin Meltzer and I had talked informally about it before
that.

So anyhow, Dan was receptive to the idea, and he put me in touch with
the right people at IBM for this kind of thing. It took a few months to
move its way through the process there, but with the help of some great
sympathetic people at IBM they came through with a tremendous
sponsorship, which is how we are able to have the cruise/banquet I told
you about earlier. To summarize: direct networking, Rolodex, and random.
(The latter two being manifestations of indirect networking, I suppose).

This covers my sponsorship efforts. Since then I have deputized a few
people at TPM to try to find some more. That is in process but they've
had some promising responses so far.

*Is the goal of a YAPC to be self-sufficient or to make a bit of money?*

**RD:** The goal is to be self-sufficient. As I understand it, there is
no official TPF position that YAPC should create a surplus that can go
back to TPF to help it fund its other goals.

That said, the previous few YAPCs have had surpluses, though not huge
ones. I really don't know if YAPC::NA 2005 in Toronto will or won't this
year.

*Thus every new sponsor you find can fund some other neat thing, like a
movie trip or the cruise?*

**RD:** Yes, that's exactly correct. As I mentioned earlier, we're still
hoping to find a sponsor for the movie night that Uri is organizing.
Sometimes sponsorship money won't be used for "fun" or "conference
enhancing" items. For instance, I really don't know whether or not I can
provide my conference volunteers with free admission to the conference.
I need to find maybe \$2000 in order just to cover their variable food
costs.

*A conference without volunteers definitely counts as "not fun" in my
book.*

**RD:** Oh, we'll have volunteers. It's just that, as things stand right
now, they'll pay their conference fee just like everyone else. I've paid
my conference fee. Many others on the volunteer side of things have
already, too. It's like that bit in "Starship Troopers": In Raczak's
Roughnecks, everyone jumps, everyone fights!

*What were you looking for when you and your team put together the
schedule this year?*

**RD:** We kind of didn't know what we were looking for, at first. The
call-for-papers (CFP) went active on January 24, I think. Up until maybe
three days before the close of CFP (April 18), we had paper submissions
totaling maybe only 75% of what was needed to fill the conference, even
if we stretched some of the talks out. When the CFP ended, we were up to
maybe 250% of what was needed to fill the conference. Yes, there were a
LOT of last minute submissions.

*I can't manage to feel any surprise!*

**RD:** No, I don't blame you.

But there's a huge difference between being an impassionate outside
observer, and being the poor schmuck who won't know whether or not their
life has meaning until the CFP totals are in in another couple of days.
I was pretty tense leading up to that.

It was pretty obvious to us that there would be certain "tracks" that
would form in the conference: Perl 6 and testing were the two big ones.
The process of putting together the schedule went something like this:

-   Pick out the very few "absolute-must-have" talks from the stack.
-   Find a time for them in the utterly empty schedule.
-   Now, figure out the talks which thematically support those talks.
-   If there are too many for those themes, then figure out if any of
    those overlap, and pick one of the overlapping.
-   And now cut the list down by another talk or two, somehow.

So now we have our anchors, and our tracks. That left us with only so
much schedule left to fill, and way too many talks to do it with. So we
(the program selection committee) went into a kind of frenzied scrum for
about two hours with back-and-forth advocating of personal favorites.
When the dust cleared, we had our schedule.

I should say that all of this happened on Saturday, April 23, when six
of us got together and spent the whole day working through the schedule.

*Did you notice other trends&gt;*

**RD:** Other trends... hmm... well, we have a database track, more or
less, which is heavily influenced by Class::DBI. Apart from that, I
don't know if there is anything we can call a trend, but I can point out
a few other features of the schedule.

The opening 1.5 hours of the first day is a plenary session--a bit of
time for Toronto.pm to welcome everyone who came (and we've got people
coming from all over the world!), followed by Larry giving a keynote,
followed by Allison giving her "state of the carrot" update on the world
of Perl over the past year. The afternoon of day three will be much as
it has been the past few years; the Lightning Talks, followed by a
closing keynote, followed by a Town Hall meeting.

One interesting thing that happened with the schedule that I was
expecting is that, in day two, we are actually going to bump up the
number of parallel tracks from three to four, which I think is a first
for a YAPC::NA. This is to accommodate a "donated tutorial" from
Stonehenge that `brian d foy`, Stonehenge trainer and originator of the
Perl Monger movement, will present. We haven't yet identified the room
at the conference venue that we will book for him, so we've been calling
it the "`brian d foy`er". We're all just way too pleased with ourselves
for that. Even once we have figured out a room, no doubt that name will
stick.

We thought it was important to put this tutorial into the schedule so
that newcomers to Perl would have something meaningful at the conference
to cater to their needs. This was raised at the Town Hall meeting in
Buffalo at the end of YAPC::NA 2004 and so we're trying to take those
comments to heart. It has meant finding more money to book the extra
room, but we all thought it was important enough to make the stretch to
do this.

*Do you expect a lot of newcomers? I didn't really catch the breakdown
between experienced programmers and neophytes at the last couple of
YAPCs.*

**RD:** I wish I was in a better position to answer that. Almost by
definition it's hard to predict, as these people don't circulate in the
same communication channels that I do. I talked with `brian d foy` about
what his expectations were in terms of the number of people who would
attend his introductory Perl tutorial at YAPC, and he said that when he
has given similar talks at similar conferences he's always had a good
turn out.

That's as close I can get to knowing, I'm afraid. As for previous YAPCs,
well, what I recall from Buffalo was that the newcomers were certainly
vocal in the Town Hall meeting. That's a good thing! I absolutely hate
the idea that the Perl community could degenerate into an echo chamber.
New perspectives are necessary.

*How is registration going?*

**RD:** Just a second...I'll have a look....

Wow! This was the first time I looked today--seven new since yesterday.
Which is huge. It could be the biggest single day jump yet. The total is
106. Which is *considerably* ahead of any previous YAPC::NAs I have any
data for this number of days before the conference starts.
(T-minus-YAPC, as it were.)

My data set goes back to YAPC::NA 2002 in St. Louis. 1999 - 2001, I
don't know. Maybe the information is out there somewhere within TPF, but
I haven't figured out where yet. Right now, my projection for
registrants + speakers + volunteers is between 300 and 400.

*Do you have access to a lot of that through previous organizers?*

**RD:** Only going back to 2002. I think that's when TPF instituted a
new back-end data system.

*How many speakers and volunteers do you estimate will be there?*

**RD:** Speakers, I don't have to estimate--the number is 45. (Not
including Lightning Talks.) Volunteers--maybe 20? 25? We're in low teens
now, and there's a lot of buzz within the larger TPM group so I expect a
lot of people will offer their time for the actual conference duration.

Regarding the range, my actual projections are for 340 right now. 300 is
being conservative, assuming we lose quite a lot of momentum. My gut
tells me that we're actually going to gain a fair bit more. 400 would be
a blow-out success.

*How many can the venue hold?*

**RD:** The venue can hold 420 before I start getting the facility
manager to start lining chairs up against the walls. More importantly,
the cruise boat can hold 500. :-) While this is all going by gut, I
think we'll be around the 400 total mark. Maybe I'm being influenced by
the seven registrants today. Earlier this weekend there was a day when
there wasn't a single registrant. That doesn't happen often. Maybe had
you asked me on that day I wouldn't have been so optimistic.

*How about the hotel and the dorms?*

**RD:**Ahh....there's the rub.

Right now, I have 250 rooms reserved in the same hotel facility that is
hosting the conference. I have 100 rooms reserved in a university dorm
about 1km away from the conference, for students or other people who are
particularly cost-conscious. I also have 50 rooms reserved in a hotel
that is part of the same university that has the dorm rooms, so that's
also about 1km away from the conference facility. So, we have plenty for
the whole conference.

But...

The group reservation for the 250 rooms at the hotel facility expires on
May 12. At that point, any unbooked rooms go back on the open market.
They're still bookable with the conference code, but they just aren't
reserved for us. So they'll probably be sold to the public with a
half-life of 4 days.

Toronto is notoriously under-served by hotels, and compounding this is
that AA is having its 75th anniversary conference in Toronto on June
30th and July 1. That conference is bringing 79,000 people into the
city. The 'thin tail' of AA conference attendees who want to come to
Toronto a bit early to do some touristing before their conference starts
will put a great deal of strain on the hotel availability in the city.

*We call that the long snout. Or the short snout, I forget.*

**RD:** Right! That's a better term. I was wondering what to call it.

Looking at things from the opposite direction, YAPC attendees who decide
at the last minute that they want to spend a few extra days in Toronto
after the conference ends will be S.O.L. trying to find a hotel. So I'm
concerned about all this.

Looking at the registration figures from the previous few years of
YAPCs, about 40% of attendees register in the last 2.5 weeks. So for
YAPC this year, that would mean 40% registering June 6 and after. There
will still be a few rooms left in the dorms and the hotel attached to
the university that contains the dorms (our booking arrangements are
slightly different with them), but still, there will be a distinct
shortage of hotel rooms.

*Anything else to say in closing?*

**RD:** YAPC is the Perl conference by Perl programmers, for Perl
programmers (and people who think they might like to be Perl
programmers). Everyone in the Toronto.pm organizing team is doing it
because we all feel so fortunate for all the support we have received
from our fellow Perl Mongers around the world, and we feel privileged to
return the generosity as best we can through the conference.

We hope you can join us in Toronto for the conference, and we're hoping
to make it a memorable one for everyone.


