{
   "draft" : null,
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "date" : "2002-10-16T00:00:00-08:00",
   "authors" : [
      "leon-brocard"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/10/p6pdigest/20021016.html",
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6 (10/7-14, 2002)",
   "description" : "This is yet another Perl 6 summary documenting what has happened over on the perl6-internals (where Parrot, the virtual machine that will run Perl 6 is discussed) and perl6-language (where Perl 6 language design is discussed) mailing lists. Piers is...",
   "thumbnail" : null
}





This is yet another Perl 6 summary documenting what has happened over on
the perl6-internals (where Parrot, the virtual machine that will run
Perl 6 is discussed) and perl6-language (where Perl 6 language design is
discussed) mailing lists. Piers is still on vacation (bungee jumping and
motocrossing, no doubt), so I'm still your host this week. A fairly
quiet week, so let's start with the perl6-internals list as usual.

### [The Pumpking Is Dead, Long Live the Pumpking!]{#the pumpking is dead, long live the pumpking!}

I am happy to report that we have a new Parrot pumpking. Jeff Goff has
done great work in the past, but taking over is Steve Fink, who has been
active in Parrot since near the beginning. He's been extremely active
this week, participating in almost all of the discussions and accepting
patches left, right and center.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=a05111b0eb9c788d82e71%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

### [Variables Have Three Parts]{#variables have three parts}

Dan Sugalski decreed that vtables were about to get more complicated.
Variables and values used to be simple, but now we need to have three
parts for each \`\`thing:'' an optional name, a container and the
contents of the container. There wasn't any discussion, but I expect Dan
will rejig vtables some more.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=a05111b07b9c6cdf2da21@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)

### [Line Number Metadata]{#line number metadata}

Juergen Boemmels explained that the line number information given by the
`setline` opcode was quite verbose in the source and suggested adding
line number metadata into Parrot bytecode. He proposed using the DWARF-2
debugging format (as used by the Mono project) so as not to reinvent the
wheel. Dan promised some specs for moving this information out of band.

This thread quickly got out of hand, with Nicholas Clark noticing that
having column number information magically built in full debugging
support for Befunge (a two-dimensional language) and Sean O'Rouke
wishing to make \`\`source position'' a vector, thus generalizing to
scripting languages of any dimension.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=m2bs66hzou.fsf@helium.physik.uni-kl.de)

### [New Array Base]{#new array base}

Leopold Toetsch continued in his attempt to confuse the summarizer with
thousands of patches. He had rewritten the base routines from the array
PMC as a working engine for list operations. It should be fast and
simple, being based on chunks with fast index get and set. He committed
this as list.c, and commented that most of the other array-style PMCs
will start to use it as a base, and that it may replace the intlist PMC
(and other typed array PMCs).

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=3DA1FBCB.3030001@toetsch.at)

### [Parrot\_sprintf]{#parrot_sprintf}

Continuing last week's \`\`sprintf in Parrot'' mention, Brent Dax
committed a huge patch completing the feature set of Parrot\_sprintf,
including width and precision for ints and strings, and modified many
little bits of code to use it.

Inspiration then struck him, or rather, vtables did. He's rewritten it
to use vtables, and split some of the code out of `misc.c` and into the
new `spf_render.c` and `spf_vtable.c`, which managed to turn into
another huge patch. Looks like there is a portability issue on PPC
systems with `va_copy` however.

[http://bugs6.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html](http://bugs6.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html?id=17791)

[http://bugs6.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html](http://bugs6.perl.org/rt2/Ticket/Display.html?id=17817)

### [Nuke dem opcodes]{#nuke dem opcodes}

Simon Glover proposed a patch to get rid of the 2-element \`\`ne''
opcode, which at a first glance should be optimizable at compiler time
and hence should not be in Parrot -- barring complicated number
precision issues. After a little discussion, Nicholas Clark pointed out
that maybe we should do as C99 and state that constant folding will be
done at compile time and at the precision of the compiling Parrot. Some
of the opcodes where nuked, but it's important to keep some opcodes just
in case of overloading.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=Pine.GSO.4.43.0210101155360.17996-100000@egg.amnh.org)

### [Getting Started Guide]{#getting started guide}

Cast your minds back, dear readers, if you will, to last week, when Erik
Lechak proposed writing a getting-started guide. Well, he did just that,
starting from the beginning with the configure system and then all the
way out. There were many comments and suggestions, and it would be great
to see this as POD and in the repository soon. Unfortunately, it is not
in the archive.

### [Larry Explains All]{#larry explains all}

Perl6-language had very few new threads this week. Instead, there were
mostly little updates to previous threads, which makes it somewhat
tricky to summarize. However, Larry Wall was everywhere this week,
giving us detailed insights into the Perl 6 language.

Larry clarified that to remove ambiguity, variable properties will
surrounded in brackets and have repetitions of \`\`is'':

      # instead of this:
      my $foo is rw cmp "";
      # we would have:
      my ($foo is foo is bar, $bar is baz) = (1,2);

Additionally, it looked like class attributes had changed name from
`attr` to `has`.

There was also some talk on the module versioning system, which could be
done with a slice-like notation:

      use Acme[1.0];                  # like so
      use Acme[ (1;17..) | (2;0..) ]; # or perhaps
      use Acme[1;17..] | Acme[2;0..]; # or even

I'm pretty sure he was joking, but Larry considered alternatives to the
`...`, which issues a warning (or maybe an exception) if you try to
execute it. `???` would never complain and `!!!` would always throw an
exception. Or the other way around. Or one is fatal. Or more likely,
stick with `...` and make its behaviour pragmatically controllable.
`...` is useful for abstract method declaration.

There definitely wasn't any talk about `&&&` and `|||`.

### [Perl6 OO Cookbook]{#perl6 oo cookbook}

Michael Lazzaro made good on his promise last week and produced a
comprehensive Perl 6 OO cookbook describing \`\`stuff that hasn't yet
been designed, for a language that doesn't yet exist.'' It is a great
piece of work and tries to examine real-life Perl 6 examples.

There was some discussion of the recipes and the Michael announced that
he wanted to work on an online system for adding new data and many other
changes. Worried about Perl 6 OO? Then check this out:

<http://cog.cognitivity.com/perl6/>

### [In Brief]{#in brief}

Some of the Parrot tests still don't work under Win32.

Some bugs in various bits of the Parrot JITs were found, and some fixed.

Dakkar found a bug in the Perl 6 compiler that basically boiled down to
checking for truth instead of definedness. Hopefully, Perl 6 will remove
this particular problem for us ;-)

We probably need more tinderboxes.

Brent Dax promises to fit a pony into his next patch.

Simon Glover added quite a few tests and pieces of documentation.

C structs need to be padded for the more exotic architectures and
compilers.

There are still some DOD / GC bugs.

### [Who's Who in Perl6]{#who's who in perl6}

Once more we get to meet people involved in the development of Perl 6.

**[Who are you?]{#item_Who_are_you%3F}**
:   Jérôme Quelin.

**[What do you do for/with Perl 6?]{#item_What_do_you_do_for%2Fwith_Perl_6%3F}**
:   I wrote a Befunge interpreter in Parrot assembly. Now I'm waiting
    for Parrot to handle multi-arrays and objects in order to implement
    the Befunge-98 specs.

**[Where are you coming from?]{#item_Where_are_you_coming_from%3F}**
:   Some Perl Golf rumors have said that I'm an alien coming from Mars.

**[When do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_When_do_you_think_Perl_6_will_be_released%3F}**
:   Some day.

**[Why are you doing this?]{#item_Why_are_you_doing_this%3F}**
:   In order to have a chance to understand Perl 6 sources. And because
    Befunge is a fun language, that deserves to be supported by Parrot.

**[You have five words. Describe yourself.]{#item_You_have_5_words%2E_Describe_yourself%2E}**
:   Perl Golf and Befunge addicted.

**[Do you have anything to declare?]{#item_Do_you_have_anything_to_declare%3F}**
:   Befunge rocks.

### [Acknowledgements]{#acknowledgements}

This summary was brought to you with slightly less distraction from
Super Mario Sunshine and more recognition of the sterling work that
Piers does every week.

As Piers says: One more, if you think this summary has value send money
to the Perl Foundation <http://donate.perl-foundation.org> and feed back
and/or T?iBooks to me, *<mailto:pdcawley@bofh.org.uk>*. As usual, the
fee paid for publication of this summary on perl.com has been donated
directly to the Perl Foundation.


