{
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6, week ending 2003-01-12",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " ... And we're back. Yup, it's summary time again. We'll dive straight in with perl6-internals (as if you expected anything else). More Thoughts on DOD Leopold T&ouml;tsch posted a test program showing the effects of PMC size and timing...",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "date" : "2003-01-12T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2003/01/p6pdigest/20020312",
   "draft" : null
}





... And we're back. Yup, it's summary time again. We'll dive straight in
with perl6-internals (as if you expected anything else).

#### [More Thoughts on DOD]{#more_thoughts_on_dod}

Leopold Tötsch posted a test program showing the effects of PMC size and
timing of garbage collection and allocation and suggested ways of
improving the GC system based on the conclusions he drew from its
results. Leo, Dan and Mitchell N Charity discussed this further and
tried a few different approaches to try and improve performance (though
Mitchell did worry about premature optimization). Work in this area is
ongoing.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E1976F7.1060106%40toetsch.at)

#### [The Perl 6 Parser]{#the_perl_6_parser}

Dan asked about the current state of the Perl 6 parser, wanting to know
what was and wasn't implemented, and wondered about adding the Perl 6
tests into the standard Parrot test suite. Sean O'Rourke and Joseph F.
Ryan both gave a summaries of where things stood. Joseph also suggested
a few refactorings of the parser to deal with the fluidity of the
current spec (almost all the operators have changed symbols since the
parser was first written for instance).

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f15ba425a3d908d%40%5B192.168.2.1%5D)

#### [LXR - Source code indexing]{#lxr__source_code_indexing}

Last week, I said that Robert Spier had 'started work on getting a
browseable, cross-referenced version of the Parrot source up on
perl.org.' What actually happened was that Robert asked Zach Lipton to
do the work. This week, Zach delivered the goods, which, I must say,
look fabulous.

I'm sure that if someone were to extend LXR so it had a better
understanding of .pasm, .pmc, .ops and other special Parrot source
types, then the community would be very grateful indeed. I know I would.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=BA41F83F.8F2D%25zach%40zachlipton.com)
-- Announcement

<http://tinderbox.perl.org/lxr/parrot/source>

#### [Thoughts on Infant Mortality]{#thoughts_on_infant_mortality}

Piers Cawley offered what he thought might be a new approach to dealing
with the infant mortality problem that got efficiently shot down by Leo
Tötsch. This led to further discussion of possible answers, and it looks
like Leo's proposed solution involving a small amount of code reordering
and early anchoring will be the one that's tried next. All being well,
it won't require walking the C stack and hardware register set, which
can only be a good thing.

Later, Leo asked whether it'd be OK to check in his work so far on
redoing the GC because he was up to 15 affected files and was starting
to worry about integration hell. Steve Fink wasn't sure about one of his
changes, so Leo checked in everything else.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=m27kdere5g.fsf%40TiBook.bofh.org.uk)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E1D47B6.20301%40toetsch.at)

#### [Objects, Finally (try 1)]{#objects,_finally_(try_1)}

Last week, I mentioned that Leon Brocard's wish list for the next Parrot
iteration included Objects. This week, Dan posted his first draft of
what Parrot Objects would and wouldn't be able to do. The 11th entry on
Dan's list (Objects are all orange) seemed to be custom-made to please
Leon. There was a fair amount of discussion (of course), but the
consensus was positive.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f06ba439cb1436b%40%5B192.168.2.1%5D)

#### [The Benchmarking Problem]{#the_benchmarking_problem}

Nicholas Clark crossposted to p5p and perl6-internals to discuss the
problems of benchmarking Parrot against Perl 5. One of parrot's aims is,
of course, to go faster than Perl 5. The problem is, how do you measure
'faster'? Nicholas has been working on making Perl 5 go faster and was
distressed to find out that using 'perlbench,' a patch of his went 5
percent faster, 1 percent slower, zero and 1 percent faster, depending
on what machine/compiler combination he ran the benchmark on. Leo Tötsch
commented that he'd found performance varying by more than 50 percent in
a JIT test, depending on the position of a loop in memory. Andreas
Koenig commented that he'd come to the conclusion that bugs in glibc
meant that there was little point in benchmarking Perl at all if it was
built with a glibc older than version 2.3 (apparently malloc/free proved
to be gloriously erratic...) I'm afraid not much was actually resolved
though.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030111190521.GK283%40Bagpuss.unfortu.net)

### [Meanwhile, in perl6-language]{#meanwhile,_in_perl6language}

The discussion of Variable types versus Value types continued from the
previous week. Dan opined that Arrays weren't necessarily objects, which
brought forth squawks from Piers Cawley who pointed out that being able
to do:

       class PersistentList is Array { 
           method FETCH ($index) { 
               ...
           }
           ...
       }

would be much nicer than tying a value in the Perl 5ish fashion. Dan
reckoned that delegation would probably be enough which, IMHO, seemed to
miss the point. Various other people chimed in to, essentially, tell Dan
that he was wrong, but I'm not sure Dan agreed with them.

Meanwhile, in a subthread sprouting lower on the thread tree, Damian
pointed out that there were two types associated with any Perl variable
-- the 'storage type' and the 'implementation type.' (See his post for
details) Essentially the storage type is the type associated with the
contents of a variable and the implementation type is the type of the
'thing' that does the storing -- usually one of SCALAR, HASH or ARRAY --
i.e., related to the variable's sigil. Specifying a different
implementation type will probably be how Perl 6 does tying.)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f07ba3e5ebbf80c%40%5B192.168.3.1%5D)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E1BF672.2020606%40conway.org)

#### [Array Questions]{#array_questions}

In a thread that spilt over from the previous discussion about whether
arrays were objects, Michael Lazzaro put up a list of examples that seem
to imply rather strongly that arrays are either objects or
indistinguishable from them, and there was general muttering that being
able to overload tied Perl containers in this way was a neat way of
implementing tie semantics. Mr Nobody attempted to restart the
left-to-right versus right-to-left argument. There was also some
discussion of the sickness of `my Foo @foo is Foo` (which, in Perl 5ish
parlance creates a tied array -- using Foo as the tying class -- which
can only contain objects in class Foo.) Damian agreed that this was
definitely sick, and that he for one would be making use of it.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=6B9F6C55-226A-11D7-81AD-00050245244A%40cognitivity.com)

#### [L2R/R2L Syntax]{#l2r/r2l_syntax}

Argh! No! It's back and this time it means business. The dreaded
left-&gt;right versus right-&gt;left thing came back, and this time it
was Damian applying the electrodes to the corpse. Of course, it being
Damian, he was instantly forgiven as he came up with the very cool, very
low precedence `~>` and `<~` operators, allowing you to write

       @out = @a ~> grep {...} ~> map {...} ~> sort;

Which is, to these eyes at least, lovely. See Damian's post for the full
details. The general response to this was definitely on the 'lovely'
side of the balance, though one detractor did induce a sense of humor
failure on Damian's part. There was also a certain amount of discussion
about whether this was exactly the right syntax to go with the
semantics, but where would perl6-language be without a great deal of
syntactic quibbling? (A good deal easier to summarize). The most popular
alternatives were `|>` and `<|`. There was also a certain amount of
discussion of what I can only describe as 'evil' uses of the syntax,
involving arrows going in different directions in one statement. Rafael
Garcia-Suarez earned at least one giggle when he suggested that we just
needed `v~` `^~` and we had our own flavour of Befunge.

There was a fair amount more discussion, mostly thrashing out details
and edge cases.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E1BA592.6050902%40conway.org)

#### ["Disappearing" code]{#disappearing_code}

John Siracusa wondered whether there would be a perl6ish way of creating
code that was 'the spiritual equivalent of \#ifdef, only Perlish.' To
which the answer is, of course, 'yes.' Damian showed off a neat trick
(modulo a couple of pretty typos) with an immediate function that
demonstrated using Perl 6 as its own macro language.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=BA438428.E548%25siracusa%40mindspring.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=BA447213.2B258%25siracusa%40mindspring.com)
-- Damian's neat trick

### [In Brief]{#in_brief}

Jim Radford fixed some typos in the *rx.ops* documentation.

### [Who's Who in Perl 6]{#who's_who_in_perl_6}

**[Who are you?]{#item_who_are_you%3f}**\
:   Steve Fink. Some guy who writes code.

**[What do you do for/with Perl 6?]{#item_what_do_you_do_for%2fwith_perl_6%3f}**\
:   The only thing I set out to do was implement a regular expression
    compiler. Along the way, I seem to have implemented hashtables,
    patched the configuration system, messed with memory management,
    implemented some stuff for IMCC, beefed up the PMC file parser,
    fixed some problems with the JIT, and a few other things. Then I got
    a job and ran out of time to work on Parrot, so they made me
    pumpking. And I still haven't made it that far with the regex
    compiler.

**[Where are you coming from?]{#item_where_are_you_coming_from%3f}**\
:   Computer games, originally. First language, BASIC; second language,
    6502 assembly. Then a failed attempt at C, then more successful
    encounters with Pascal and 68000 assembly, and then C++. Next, a few
    more assembly languages together with SML, NESL, Lisp, Scheme,
    COBOL, Tcl, Prolog, and a few others. And, at last, Perl4 and then
    Perl5. Oh, and Java, fairly recently. My day job is now in a
    combination of Perl5 and C++, as well as C when nobody's looking.

**[When do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_when_do_you_think_perl_6_will_be_released%3f}**\
:   Probably smoothing the path for other developers and keeping them
    motivated. My highest priority is applying (and testing) other
    people's patches, since the mostly likely reason for someone to lose
    interest is to not have their hard work make it into the
    distribution. I would also like to somehow make people's
    contributions more visible -- anyone who has contributed anything
    significant should at least be able to point to something and say
    "Look! I did that! See my name?!"

**[I said, when do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_i_said%2c_when_do_you_think_perl_6_will_be_release}**\
:   Obviously, Leopold Tötsch. Anyone paying an iota of attention would
    know that. Particularly someone who's been writing the summaries,
    unless you're stupid or something. Leo's amazing; I don't know how
    he finds the time. To accomplish that much, I'd need to be working
    full-time about 26 hours a day.

**[No, really. When do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_no%2c_really%2e_when_do_you_think_perl_6_will_be_r}**\
:   No, not really. I was originally thinking of Perl6 when I got
    involved, but since then the Parrot VM itself has become more
    interesting to me. Although I still wish Perl6 development would
    pick up -- there's a lot that can be done even with the limited
    amount of the language that's been defined. Sean O'Rourke did an
    excellent job in a short amount of time, but it looks like real life
    has drawn him back into its fold, and nobody seems to have picked up
    the slack.

**[Why are you doing this?]{#item_why_are_you_doing_this%3f}**\
:   Heh. That is the question, isn't it? Making a release is probably
    the most concrete measure of how I'm doing as a pumpking, and by
    that standard I'm a dismal failure. As soon as we reclaim the
    tinderbox (and without dropping any machines off it in order to do
    so!) Everything else I wanted to get in is already there.

**[You have five words. Describe yourself.]{#item_you_have_five_words%2e_describe_yourself%2e}**\
:   No, I don't think so. Maybe I'm wrong, but I know that I personally
    had to put aside a lot of the actual coding I was working on in
    order to concentrate on making sure everyone else's changes were
    being given proper consideration. I'd much rather relieve him of
    that burden, and let him continue to exercise his demonstrated
    talent at churning out quality code.

**[Do you have anything to declare?]{#item_do_you_have_anything_to_declare%3f}**\
:   No. It kind of makes sense, but I remember how I first started by
    rewriting a bunch of Dan Sugalski's code, and then seeing most of my
    code get rewritten. I used to be disturbed by that, but now I think
    of it more as a badge of honor -- it proves that what I wrote was
    worth rewriting. Much more so in Dan's case, I suppose, since he
    stated up-front that he was merely doing a reference implementation
    of a design. Dan's done an amazing job of laying out a design that
    hasn't needed to change at its core, and so has been a very
    dependable guide to the implementation of the backbone. But even in
    my case, I can see a number of ideas that were carried through in
    the reimplementation, even if no actual code survived.
    (Interestingly, my tests did. Which kind of makes sense if you think
    about it.)

**[Are you finished yet?]{#item_are_you_finished_yet%3f}**\
:   Why yes, thank you.

Ahem. Thanks Steve. Really.

### [Acknowledgements]{#acknowledgements}

Another Monday evening, another summary running over into Tuesday
morning. Ah well. Distractions were provided by the usual suspects (Mike
and Sully, our ginger kittens), supplemented this week by a horrible
cold (the compulsion to find a tissue does tend to derail the train of
thought).

Proofreading was once more handled by Aspell and me. This week, we even
made sure that the Who's Who section contains the name of the person
answering the questions rather than making you wait 'til the
acknowledgements section.

Speaking of which, many thanks to Steve Fink for his answers to the
questionnaire (well, to the questions he wanted to answer anyway). The
questionnaire queue is now quite empty so, unless a few more folks in
the Perl 6 community send me some answers soon then the Who's Who
section may be going on hiatus. Send your answers (or request the
'correct' question list from) *<5Ws@bofh.org.uk>*.

If you didn't like this summary, then how did you get this far? If you
did like it, then please consider one or more of the following options:

-   Send money to the Perl Foundation at
    <http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
    development of Perl 6.
-   Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open to
    all. <http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and <http://www.parrotcode.org/>
    are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing
    lists.
-   Send feedback, flames, money and or a couple of first-class flights
    to from London to Portland for this year's OSCON to
    *<mailto:p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>* ("Aim high!" they told me.)

The fee paid for the publication of these summarize on perl.com is paid
directly to the Perl Foundation.

The Perl 6 Summarizer disclaims any and all responsibility for the
sanity of his readers; he's having enough trouble hanging onto his own.


