{
   "tags" : [
      "beginner",
      "elitism",
      "learn",
      "newbie",
      "perl"
   ],
   "categories" : "Community",
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "2001-05-28T00:00:00-08:00",
   "title" : "Turning the Tides on Perl's Attitude Toward Beginners",
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/05/29/tides.html",
   "authors" : [
      "casey-west"
   ],
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : "Turning the Tide on Perl's Attitude Toward Beginners -> The Perl community has held tight to a \"zero tolerance\" policy for beginners. The transition to a more accepting, responsible community has begun. The past is behind us and the future..."
}





\
The Perl community has held tight to a "zero tolerance" policy for
beginners. The transition to a more accepting, responsible community has
begun. The past is behind us and the future looks brighter.

### [The Way We Were]{#The_Way_We_Were}

As far back as I can remember, asking a question that has been answered
before is one of the many deadly sins of the Perl community. The general
attitude revolved around, "If the docs are good enough for me, they're
good enough for you. RTFM." One first-time programmer could easily
accumulate 10 flames in his inbox after asking a question about why this
code didn't print anything out:

      my $input    = <STDIN>;
      my $username = chop( $input );
      print "$username";

After said programmer has been flambe'ed to perfection they have to
endure five more messages concerning the use of `chop()` and its evils,
not to mention a handful of warnings about why putting double quotes
around `$username` will cause famine in the land. Granted, these last
few messages contain good information, but it's unlikely the beginner
will even read these messages. Why would anyone want to subject
themselves to more abuse when it's easier to delete the messages and
move on to another programming language?

It seems that the very thing we want to have happen, adding number to
our ranks, is the first thing we fight against when beginners show their
faces. Wielding our swords of "RTFM" and shields of "killfile" we smite
the very programmers that will carry this language into the future. I
have a co-worker who is known for saying, "It's a good thing Perl is so
powerful and cool, it barely makes up for the collective, childish
'elitism' displayed by its community." Collectively, this is a sad
truth.

Many programmers end up turning to alternate languages and communities,
ones that don't require them to carry fire trucks in their back pocket.
For instance, Python has a mailing list designed to be a "Help Desk." It
doesn't get much better than that for a beginner.

Another path to travel is the pay software route. If I pay Microsoft for
their software, developer resources and customer support, they'll be
nice to me. They won't call me a newbie. They won't prepare the clue
stick, they'll give me all the answers I need. Believe it or not, folks,
this is our competition, too. Forget about a single programmer turned
away, this affects whole companies. A corporation has the wallet to turn
away from Perl if it feels the support is "lacking."

One would figure that, with Perl's age, the community would have
fostered a powerful, useful medium to ease the newcomer into our world.
When a child is born, it requires extreme amounts of care, attention and
guidance for several years. Most children aren't told to sit in the
corner and RTFM until they get it; that's cruel and unusual punishment.
Why then, must we be any different? We all have the ability to help
programmers grow and mature, to shape their views and opinions. It's
time for us to open up and give back to our trade. All of us have
received gentle guidance; we are all capable of giving some back.

In short, no good has come of this.

### [A Step in the Right Direction]{#A_Step_In_the_Right_Direction}

Last month, a few folks on the Perl Porters list decided enough was
enough. Casey West set out in search of a new mailing list for Perl
beginners. Some concerns were raised regarding the validity of the list
but, overall, there was acceptance. Out of the blue, Ask Bjoern Hansen
came barreling through the crowd announcing that the list had been
created -- three days before. `;-)`

It was time to find out if the Perl community needed a friendly,
fire-free environment to foster growth and knowledge in the masses. It
was time to find out if there *were* any masses. It was also time to
find out if the Perl community would be willing to jump in and help.
Don't you just love the suspense? On with the show!

### [beginners@perl.org]{#beginners_perl_org}

It has been one month and statistics speak for themselves. Thirteen
hundred messages were sent last month, sending my mbox to more than 3.5
MB. As far as Perl lists are concerned, this is near the
highest-trafficked list. Of course, the Python "Help Desk" list
generates a solid 4000+ messages a month, with excellence.

Under normal circumstances, generating that much beginner traffic would
cause the list to combust, sending fireballs as far as the eye can see.
Not this time. Established folks in the Perl community have made an
effort to put the gloves on and play nice. As list baby-sitter, I have
only had to slap a handful of wrists, and the people attached to them
have responded honorably. Nearly all questions have been answered at
least once and every customer seems to be satisfied.

[]{#beginnerscgi@perl.org}<beginners-cgi@perl.org>
--------------------------------------------------

The `beginners` list recently split in two. The `beginners-cgi` list was
created as a means to cut back on the amount of traffic. Many people
were finding it hard to keep up with the flow of just one list. This is
understandable considering we have over 1000 subscribers to the
`beginners` list.

[]{#dailytips@perl.org}<daily-tips@perl.org>
--------------------------------------------

Ask and I started the `daily-tips` mailing list. This list will be
sending our daily mailings with simple tips for beginners. The tips will
cover a wide range of topics, in the form of \`\`Questions and Answer''.
We won't be mailing from the standard Perl FAQ, there's already a list
for that. Instead, we'll be taking submissions from the community and
mailing them (That means you!). More information on this list can be
found at <http://learn.perl.org/>.

[beginners-workers]{#beginnersworkers@perl.org}
-----------------------------------------------

The `beginners-workers` mailing list is the place to send your
`daily-tips` submissions, as well as your thoughts on how the Perl
community should be helping beginners. Ask, Adam Turoff, Kevin Meltzer
and I (and others) will be reading this list and responding if
necessary. The Beginners Team is working hard on this list to get a
number of initiatives rolling. Thanks to the people mentioned above, and
many other folks for your continued help and support.

### [\#perl-help]{#_perl_help}

Another fine member of the Perl community, Kevin Lenzo, followed up the
mailing list announcement with one of his own. He created an IRC channel
named `#perl-help` on `irc.rhizomatic.net` and even attached the lovable
purl bot to it. Kevin reports moderate and friendly traffic on this
channel.

This is an exciting move, because it provides real-time results. The
ability to interact with someone in real time makes this a complete win.
Believe me, you won't go away disappointed from this channel: the people
there are fast and fun to work with.

### [Code Review BOF at the Perl Conference]{#Code_Review_BOF_at_The_Perl_Conf}

Peter Scott and I have teamed up to make the second TPC Code Review
bigger and better than ever. A number of the top Perl people have
volunteered to review code, free of charge. The format will be similar
to last years BOF. This is your opportunity to get advice from Perl's
best without having to pay their rates.

If you are attending this year's TPC and you have some questions about
your code, please stop by. It doesn't matter what your question is, all
subjects are open. We are putting an emphasis on answering beginners'
questions but, please, don't hesitate to bring your latest regex engine
patch for review, we have people who can do that, too.

### [Onward and Upward]{#Onward_and_Upward}

The Perl community has had a taste of success with the beginners list
and IRC channels. We will hopefully solidify our new found stance at the
Perl Conference with the Code Review BOF. So what happens next? Are we
finished? Not by a long shot.

Ask and I have begun work on *http:*, a modest site dedicated to helping
people learn Perl. At the moment it is slightly bare, hosting only the
beginners list FAQ, which is maintained by Kevin Meltzer. This is all
about to change.

*learn.perl.org* will become a beginners documentation project. We are
asking for contributions from the Perl community for tutorials. The
topics of these tutorials may be broad, covering everything from text
editors with Perl syntax highlighting to in-depth research on why one
should use `while` to loop over files. We hope, with time, that
*learn.perl.org* can mature into a central, community-lead documentation
project: the Perl Documentation Project.

### [Pioneering the Status Quo Revolution]{#Pioneering_the_Status_Quo_Revolu}

It has been the general opinion of the open-source community that, if
you can't find the answers yourself, you're lost. Read the
documentation, if there is no documentation, read the source. If there
is no source, you've stepped out of the world as we know it. If you're a
greenhorn and you can't figure it out from the docs or the source,
goodbye. And not just goodbye, but a plague on your house as well.

This attitude is just not good enough any more. Frankly, it's a terrible
way to behave. Any child can play the "I'm not telling you, figure it
out yourself" game, complete with fingers wiggling from the ears and a
stuck out tongue. It's time for us to collectively grow up. As a
community, we need to mature. We need to get up and help each other.

I admit, I have been on the giving end of the flamethrower serveral
times in the past. It seemed like a fun idea at first, but it really
isn't. After I sent flames, I felt terrible, often going back to the
recipient and asking forgiveness. That's just what it did to me, I hate
to think about how it made the other guy feel. What kind of impression
did I give him about me, about the Perl community, about open source?
What we do in public really does reach that far: We are responsible for
the people we represent, like it or not. So let's all grow up and
represent them well.

This reaches far beyond the walls of Perl ( no pun... ). I am beginning
to see the awareness all around the open-source community. We are in
need of a change and the challenge is here. The Perl community has begun
its journey, let's be the ones to carry it through the rest of open
source, and beyond.

### [Closing Thoughts]{#Closing_Thoughts}

My dream is for a Perl community that stands together with kindess and
open arms. Many may feel this is a goal too lofty for us. I couldn't
disagree more. We have shown the world that we can do just about
anything; this should be easy. I know I'm not the only one who shares
this opinion.

*"But, paradoxically, the way in which Perl helps you the most has
almost nothing to do with Perl, and everything to do with the people who
use Perl. Perl folks are, frankly, some of the most helpful folks on
earth. If there's a religious quality to the Perl movement, then this is
at the heart of it. Larry wanted the Perl community to function like a
little bit of heaven, and he seems to have gotten his wish, so far.
Please do your part to keep it that way."* -- Preface, Programming Perl
2nd Edition


