{
   "categories" : "development",
   "tags" : [
      "java-inline"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "phil-crow"
   ],
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "2003-11-07T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2003/11/07/java.html",
   "title" : "Bringing Java into Perl",
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2003_11_07_java/111-java_perl.gif",
   "description" : "In this article, I will show how to bring Java code into a Perl program with Inline::Java. I won't probe the internals of Inline or Inline::Java, but I will tell you what you need to make a Java class available..."
}





In this article, I will show how to bring Java code into a Perl program
with `Inline::Java`. I won't probe the internals of `Inline` or
`Inline::Java`, but I will tell you what you need to make a Java class
available in a program or module. The program/module distinction is
important only in one small piece of syntax, which I will point out.

The article starts with the Java code to be glued into Perl, then shows
several approaches for doing so. First, the code is placed directly into
a Perl program. Second, the code is placed into a module used by a
program. Finally, the code is accessed via a small Perl proxy in the
module.

### [The Java Code]{#the_java_code}

Consider the following Java class:

        public class Hi {

            String greeting;

            public Hi(String greeting) {
                this.greeting = greeting;
            }

            public void setGreeting(String newGreeting) {
                greeting = newGreeting;
            }

            public String getGreeting() {
                return greeting;
            }
        }

This class is for demonstration only. Each of its objects is nothing but
a wrapper for the string passed to the constructor. The only operations
are accessors for that one string. Yet with this, we will learn most of
what we need to know to use Java from Perl. Later, we will add a few
features, to show how arrays are handled. That's not as interesting as
it sounds, since `Inline::Java` almost always does all of the work
without help.

### [A Program]{#a_program}

Since we're talking about Perl, there is more than one way to
incorporate our trivial Java class into a Perl program. (Vocabulary
Note: Some people call Perl programs "scripts." I try not to.) Here,
I'll show the most direct approach. Subsequent sections move to more and
more indirect approaches, which are more often useful in practice.

Not surprisingly, the most direct approach is the simplest to
understand. See if you can follow this:

        #!/usr/bin/perl
        use strict; use warnings;

        use Inline Java => <<'EOJ';
        public class Hi {
            // The class body is shown in the Java Code above
        }
        EOJ

        my $greeter = Hi->new("howdy");
        print $greeter->getGreeting(), "\n";

The Java class is the one above, so I have omitted all but the class
declaration. The Perl code just wraps it, so it is tiny. To use
`Inline::Java`, say `use Inline Java => code` where `code` tells
`Inline` where to look for the code. In this case, the code follows
inline (clever naming, huh?). Note that single-quote context is safest
here. There are other ways to include the code; we'll see my favorite
way later. The overly curious are welcome to consult the perldoc for all
of the others.

Once `Inline::Java` has worked its magic -- and it is highly magical --
we can use the Java `Hi` class as if it was a Perl package.
`Inline::Java` provides several ways to construct Java objects. I
usually use the one shown here; namely, I pretend the Java constructor
is called `new`, just like many Perl constructors are. In honor of Java,
you might rather say `my $greeter = new Hi("howdy");`, but I usually
avoid this indirect object form. You can even call the constructor by
the class name as in `my $greeter = Hi->Hi("howdy");` (or, you could
even say the pathological `my $greeter = Hi Hi("howdy");`). Class
methods are accessed just like the constructor, except that their names
are the Java method names. Instance methods are called through an object
reference, as if the reference were a Perl object.

Note that `Inline::Java` performs type conversions for us, so we can
pass and receive Java primitive types in the appropriate Perl variables.
This carries over to arrays, etc. When you think about what must be
going on under the hood, you'll realize what a truly magical module this
is.

### [A Module]{#a_module}

I often say that most Perl code begins life in a program. As time goes
by, the good parts of that code, the ones that can be reused, are
factored out into modules. Suppose our greeter is really popular, so
many programs want to use it. We don't want to have to include the Java
code in each one (and possibly require each program to compile its own
copy of the class file). Hence, we want a module. My module looks a lot
like my earlier program, except for two features. First, I changed the
way `Inline` looks for the code, which has nothing to do with whether
the code is in a program or a module. Second, reaching class methods
from any package other than `main` requires careful -- though not
particularly difficult -- qualification of the method name.

        package Hi;
        use strict; use warnings;

        use Inline Java => "DATA";

        sub new {
            my $class    = shift;
            my $greeting = shift;
            return Hi::Hi->new($greeting);
        }

        1;

        __DATA__
        __Java__
        public class Hi {
            // The class body is shown in The Java Code above
        }

The package starts like all good packages, by using `strict` and
`warnings`. The `use Inline` statement is almost like the previous one,
but the code lives in the `__DATA__` segment instead of actually being
inline. Note that when you put the code in the `__DATA__` segment, you
must include a marker for your language so that `Inline` can find it.
There are usually several choices for each language's marker; I chose
`__Java__`. This allows `Inline` to glue from multiple languages into
one source file.

The constructor is needed so that the caller does not need to know they
are interfacing with `Inline::Java`. They call the constructor with
`Hi->new("greeting")` as they would for a typical package called `Hi`.
Yet, the module's constructor must do a bit of work to get the right
object for the caller. It starts by retrieving the arguments, then
returns the result of the unusual call `Hi::Hi->new(...)`. The first
`Hi` is for the Perl package and the second is for the Java class; both
are required. Just as in the program from the last section, there are
multiple ways to call the constructor. I chose the direct method with
the name `new`. You could use the indirect object form and/or call the
method by the class name. The returned object can be used as normal, so
I just pass it back to the caller. All instance methods are passed
directly through `Inline::Java` without help from `Hi.pm`. If there were
class methods (declared with the `static` keyword in Java), I would
either have to provide a wrapper, or the caller would have to qualify
the names. Neither solution is particularly difficult, but I favor the
wrapper, to keep the caller's effort to a minimum. This is my typical
laziness at work. Since there will likely be several callers, and I will
have to write them, I want to push any difficult parts into the module.

If you need to adapt the behavior of the Java object for your Perl
audience, you may insert routines in `Hi.pm` to do that. For instance,
perhaps you want a more typical Perl accessor, instead of the
`get`/`set` pair used in the Java code. In this case, you must make your
own genuine Perl object and proxy through it to the Java class. That
might look something like this:

        package Hi2;
        use strict; use warnings;

        use Inline Java => "DATA";

        sub new {
            my $class    = shift;
            my $greeting = shift;
            bless { OBJECT => Hi2::Hi->new($greeting) }, $class;
        }

        sub greeting {
            my $self      = shift;
            my $new_value = shift;
            if (defined $new_value) {
                $self->{OBJECT}->setGreeting($new_value);
            }
            return $self->{OBJECT}->getGreeting();
        }

        1;

        __DATA__
        __Java__
        public class Hi {
            // Body omitted again
        }

Here, the object returned from `Inline::Java`, which I'll call the Java
object for short, is stored in the `OBJECT` key of a hash-based `Hi2`
object that is returned to the caller. The distinction between the Perl
package and the Java class is clear in this constructor call. The Perl
package comes first, then the Java class, then the class method to call.

The `greeting` method, shifts in the `$new_value`, which the caller
supplies if she wants to change the value. If `$new_value` is defined,
`greeting` passes the `set` message to the Java object. In either case,
it returns the current value to the caller, as Perl accessors usually
do.

### [A Pure Proxy]{#a_pure_proxy}

In the last section, we saw how to make a Perl module access Java code.
We also saw how to make the Perl module adapt between the caller's
expectation of Perl objects and the underlying Java objects. Here, we
will see how to access Java classes that can't be included in the Perl
code.

There are a lot of Java libraries. These are usually distributed in
compiled form in so-called *.jar* (**j**ava **ar**chive) files. This is
good design on the part of the Java community, just as using modules is
good design on the part of the Perl community. Just as we wanted to make
the `Hi` Java class available to lots of programs -- and thus placed it
in a module -- so the Java people put reusable code in .jars. (Yes, Java
people share the bad pun heritage of the Unix people, which brought us
names like `yacc`, `bison`, `more`, and `less`.)

Suppose that our humble greeter is so popular that it has been greatly
expanded and .jarred for worldwide use. Unless we provide an adapter
like the one shown earlier, the caller must use the .jarred code from
Perl in a Java-like way. So I will now show three pieces of code: 1) an
expanded greeter, 2) a Perl driver that uses it, and 3) a mildly
adapting Perl module the driver can use.

Here's the expanded greeter; the two Perl pieces follow later:

        import java.util.Random;
        public class Higher {
            private static Random myRand = new Random();
            private String[] greetings;

            public Higher(String[] greetings) {
                this.greetings = greetings;
            }

            public void setGreetings(String[] newGreetings) {
                greetings = newGreetings;
            }

            public String[] getGreetings() {
                return greetings;
            }

            public void setGreeting(int index, String newGreeting) {
                greetings[index] = newGreeting;
            }

            public String getGreeting() {
                float randRet = myRand.nextFloat();
                int   index   = (int) (randRet * greetings.length);
                return greetings[index];
            }
        }

Now there are multiple greetings, so the constructor takes an array of
`Strings`. There are `get`/`set` pairs for the whole list of greetings
and for single greetings. The single `get` accessor returns one greeting
at random. The single `set` accessor takes the index of the greeting to
replace and its new value.

Note that Java arrays are fixed-size; don't let `Inline::Java` fool you
into thinking otherwise. It is very good at making you think Java works
just like Perl, even though this is not the case. Calling `setGreeting`
with an out-of-bounds index will be fatal unless trapped. Yes, you can
trap Java exceptions with `eval` and the `$@` variable.

This driver uses the newly expanded greeter through `Hi3.pm`:

        #!/usr/bin/perl
        use strict; use warnings;

        use Hi3;

        my $greeter = Hi3->new(["Hello", "Bonjour", "Hey Y'all", "G'Day"]);
        print $greeter->getGreeting(), "\n";
              $greeter->setGreeting(0, "Howdy");
        print $greeter->getGreeting(), "\n";

The `Hi3` module (directly below) provides access to the Java code. I
called the constructor with an anonymous array. An array reference also
works, but a simple list does not. The constructor returns a Java object
(at least, it looks that way to us); the other calls just provide
additional examples. Note, in particular, that `setGreeting` expects an
`int` and a `String`. `Inline::Java` examines the arguments and coerces
them into the best types it can. This nearly always works as expected.
When it doesn't, you need to look in the documentation for "CASTING."

Finally, this is `Hi3.pm` (behold the power of Perl and the work of the
`Inline` developers):

        package Hi3;
        use strict; use warnings;

        BEGIN {
            $ENV{CLASSPATH} .= ":/home/phil/jar_home/higher.jar";
        }
        use Inline Java  => 'STUDY',
                   STUDY => ['Higher'];

        sub new {
            my $class = shift;
            return Hi3::Higher->new(@_);
        }

        1;

To use a class hidden in a .jar I need to do three things:

1.  Make sure an absolute path to the .jar file is in the `CLASSPATH`,
    *before* using `Inline`. A well-placed `BEGIN` block makes this
    happen.
2.  Use `STUDY` instead of providing Java source code.
3.  Add the `STUDY` directive to the `use Inline` statement. This tells
    `Inline::Java` to look for named classes. In this case, the list has
    only one element: `Higher`. Names in this list must be fully
    qualified if the corresponding class has a Java package.

The constructor just calls the `Higher` constructor through
`Inline::Java`, as we have seen before.

Yes, this is the whole module, all 15 lines of it.

If you need an adapter between your caller and the Java library, you can
put it in either Perl or Java code. I prefer to code such adapters in
Perl when possible, following the plan we saw in the previous section.
Yet occasionally, that is too painful, and I resort to Java. For
example, the glue module `Java::Build::JVM` uses both a Java and a Perl
adapter to ease communication with the genuine `javac` compiler. Look at
the `Java::Build` distribution from CPAN for details.

### [Anatomy of Automated Compiling: A Brief Discussion]{#anatomy_of_automated_compiling__a_brief_discussion}

So what is `Inline::Java` doing for us? When it finds our Java code, it
makes a copy in the .java file of the proper name (`javac` is adamant
that class names and file names match). Then it uses our Java compiler
to build a compiled version of the program. It puts that version in a
directory, using an MD5 sum to ensure that recompiling happens when and
only when the code changes.

You can cruise through the directories looking at what it did. If
something goes wrong, it will even give you hints about where to look.
Here's a tour of some of those directories. First, there is a base
directory. If you don't do anything special, it will be called
*\_Inline*, under the working directory from which you launched the
program. If you have a *.Inline* directory in your home directory, all
`Inline` modules will use it. If you use the `DIRECTORY` directive in
your `use Inline` statement, its value will be used instead. For ease of
discussion, I'll call the directory *\_Inline*.

Under *\_Inline* is a config file that describes the various `Inline`
languages available to you. More importantly, there are two
subdirectories: *build* and *lib*. If your code compiles, the *build*
directory will be cleaned. (That's the default behavior; you can include
directives in your `use Inline` statement to control this.) If not, the
*build* directory has a subdirectory for your program, with part of the
MD5 sum in its name. That directory will hold the code in its .java file
and the error output from javac in *cmd.out*.

Code that successfully compiles ends up in *lib/auto*. The actual .class
files end up in a subdirectory, which is again named by class and MD5
sum. Typically, there will be three files there. The .class file is as
normal. The other files describe the class. The .inl file has an
`Inline` description of the class. It contains the full MD5 sum, so code
does not need to be recompiled unless it changes. It also says when the
code was compiled, along with a lot of other information about the
`Inline::Java` currently installed. The .jdat file is specific to
`Inline::Java`. It lists the signatures of the methods available in the
class. `Inline::Java` finds these using Java's reflection system
(reflection is the Java term for symbolic references).

### [See Also]{#see_also}

For more information on `Inline` and `Inline::Java` and the other inline
modules, see their perldoc. If you want to join in, sign up for the
<inline@perl.org> mailing list, which is archived at
[nntp.x.perl.org/group/perl.inline](http://nntp.x.perl.org/group/perl.inline).

### [Acknowledgements]{#acknowledgements}

Thanks to Brian Ingerson for `Inline` and Patrick LeBoutillier for
`Inline::Java`. These excellent modules have saved me much time and
heartache. In fact, I doubt I would have had the courage to use Java in
Perl without them. Double thanks to Patrick LeBoutillier, since he took
the time to read this article and correct some errors (including my
failure to put "Bonjour" in the greetings list).


