{
   "title" : "Perl Needs Better Tools",
   "tags" : [
      "epic",
      "perl-development",
      "perl-ide",
      "perl-refactoring",
      "perl-tools"
   ],
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/08/25/tools",
   "date" : "2005-08-25T00:00:00-08:00",
   "categories" : "Tooling",
   "draft" : null,
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/111-improving_tools.gif",
   "image" : null,
   "description" : " Perl is in danger of becoming a fading language-new programmers are learning Java and Python in college, and companies like Google hardly use Perl at all. If you are afraid that Perl may be in danger of becoming irrelevant...",
   "authors" : [
      "matisse-enzer"
   ]
}





\
Perl is in danger of becoming a fading language--new programmers are
learning Java and Python in college, and companies like Google hardly
use Perl at all. If you are afraid that Perl may be in danger of
becoming irrelevant for medium-to-large projects, then read on.

### The Scary Part

I have discussed the future of Perl with managers from companies that
currently use it and find that they worry about the future of Perl. One
company I spoke with here in San Francisco is rewriting their core
application in Java. Another company worries they will not be able to
find new Perl programmers down the road. Yet another uses Perl for major
projects, but suffers from difficulty in refactoring their extensive
code base.

There are many reasons why companies care about the future of Perl. I
offer a part of a solution: better tools for Perl can be a major part of
keeping Perl relevant and effective as the primary language for medium
and large projects.

When measuring the effectiveness of a development environment (people,
language, tools, processes, etc.), a key measure is how expensive and
painful it is to make changes to existing code. Once a project or system
has grown to thousands of lines of code in dozens (or hundreds) of
modules, the cost of making changes can escalate to the point where the
team is afraid to make any significant change. Excellent tools are one
of the ways to avoid this unhappy situation, or at least reduce its
impact. Other factors are excellent processes and, of course, excellent
people.

### 21st-Century Integrated Development Environments for Perl

I propose that more, high-quality development tools will help keep Perl
relevant and alive in medium and large project environments. My focus in
this article is on IDEs, or Integrated Development Environments, and
primarily those with a graphical interface.

An IDE is an integrated set of tools for programming, combining a source
code editor with a variety of other tools into a single package. Common
features of modern IDEs include refactoring support, version control,
real-time syntax checking, and auto-completion of code while typing.

I want to make it clear right at the outset that a team of highly
skilled Perl programmers, using only tools that have been around for
years (such as `emacs`, `vi`, `cvs`, and `make`) can and do build large,
sophisticated, and successful projects. I am not worried about those
programmers. I am worried about the larger population of programmers
with one to five years of experience, and those who have not yet begun
to program: the next generation of Perl programmers.

Great tools will not make a bad programmer into a good programmer, but
they will certainly make a good programmer better. Unfortunately, the
tools for Perl are years behind what is available for other languages,
particularly Java.

One powerful example is the lack of graphical IDEs for Perl with
excellent support for refactoring. Several IDEs for Java have extensive
refactoring support. Only one for Perl, the [EPIC plugin for
Eclipse](http://e-p-i-c.sf.net/), supports even a single refactoring
action.

For an example of how good IDEs have inspired at least one Perl
developer, see [Adam Kennedy](/pub/au/Kennedy_Adam)'s [Perl.com article
on his new PPI module](/pub/a/2005/06/09/ppi.html) and [Scott Sotka's
Devel::Refactor module](http://search.cpan.org/dist/Devel-Refactor/)
(used in EPIC).

I acknowledge that a graphical IDE is not the be-all of good tools. Just
as some writers reject word processors in favor of typewriters or
hand-written manuscripts, some programmers reject graphical IDEs and
would refuse a job that required them to use one. Not everyone has (nor
should have) the same tool set, and there are things a pencil can do
that `vi` and `emacs` will never do. That said, IDEs have wide use in
businesses doing larger projects, and for many programmers and teams
they provide major increases in productivity.

Another important point is that while this article discusses over a
dozen specific tools or features, having all the tools in a single
package produces the biggest value. An IDE that provides all of these
features in a single package that people can easily install, easily
extend, and easily maintain across an entire development team has far
more value than the sum of its parts.

There is a big win when the features provided by an IDE immediately upon
installation include all or almost all of the tools and features
discussed here and where the features "know" about each other. For
example, it is good if you enter the name of a non-existent subroutine
and the real-time syntax checker catches this. It is much better if the
code-assist feature then pops up a context menu offering to create a
stub for the subroutine or to correct the name to that of an existing
similar subroutine or method from another class that is available to the
current file. (This is standard behavior for some Java IDEs.)

### What Would a 21st-Century Perl Tool Set Contain?

Perl needs a few great IDEs--not just one, but more than one so that
people have a diverse set to choose from. Perl deserves and needs a few
great IDEs that lead the pack and set the standard for IDEs in other
languages.

I am well aware that the dynamic nature of Perl makes it harder to have
a program that can read and understand a Perl program, especially a
large and complex one, but the difficulty in comprehending a Perl
program makes the value of such a tool all the greater, and I have faith
that the Perl community can overcome some of the built-in challenges of
Perl. Indeed, it is among the greatest strengths of Perl that Perl users
can adapt the language to their needs.

A great Perl IDE will contain at least the following, plus other
features I haven't thought of. (And, of course, there must be many of
those!)

-   A [syntax-coloring text editor.](#Syntax-coloring_text_editor)
-   [Real-time syntax-checking](#Syntax-checking) to catch and display
    syntax errors as you type.
-   [Version control integration](#Version_control_integration) to check
    out and compare code using CVS, Subversion, etc.
-   A [code-assist editor](?page=3#Code-assist), to provide a list of
    methods when you type in an object reference, for example.
-   [Excellent refactoring support](?page=3#refactoring_support).
-   A [tree view of source files and
    resources](?page=4#Tree_view_of_source).
-   [Support for creating and running unit
    tests](?page=4#support_for_unit_tests).
-   [Language-specific help](?page=5#Language-specific_help).
-   [Real-time display of debugging results](?page=5#Debugger).
-   [Automatic code reformatting](?page=5#Automatic_reformatting).
-   Seamless [handling of multiple
    languages](?page=5#handling_of_multiple_languages) (such as Perl and
    C, Perl and Java, Perl and PHP, or Perl and Python).
-   [Automated build and test
    support](?page=5#Automated_build_and_test).

Most of the screen shot examples in this article use the EPIC Perl IDE.
At present, it has the largest amount of the features on my list
(although it certainly doesn't have all of them).

#### [Syntax-Coloring Text Editor]{#Syntax-coloring_text_editor}

Most of you have probably seen this. It is available under `vim`,
`emacs`, BBEdit, and TextPad. Just about every decent text editor will
colorize source code so that keywords, operators, variables, etc., each
have their own color, making it easier to spot syntax errors such as
forgetting to close a quote pair.

#### [Real-Time Syntax Checking]{#Syntax-checking}

![real-time syntax check
example](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/syntax_check.gif){width="309"
height="135"}\
*Figure 1. Real-time syntax checking*

The IDE in Figure 1 shows that line 4 has an error because of the
missing `)` and that line 5 has an error because there is no declaration
of `$naame` (and `use strict` is in effect).

A key point here is that the IDE shows these errors right away, before
you save and compile the code. (In this example, the EPIC IDE lets you
specify how often to run the syntax check, from 0.01 to 10.00 seconds of
idle time, or only on demand.)

As nice as this is, it would be even better if the IDE also offered ways
to fix the problem, for example, offering to change `$naame` to `$name`.
Figure 2 shows an IDE that does exactly that; unfortunately, for Java,
not Perl.

![syntax help from the
IDE](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/syntax_help.gif){width="427"
height="150"}\
*Figure 2. Syntax help from the IDE*

It would be great if Perl IDEs offered this kind of help.

#### [Version Control Integration]{#Version_control_integration}

All non-insane large projects use version control software. The most
common version control software systems are probably CVS, Perforce,
Subversion, and Visual SourceSafe. Figure 3 shows an IDE comparing the
local version of a file to an older version from the CVS repository.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| [![Figure                                                             |
| 3](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/cvs_compare_sm.gif){width="220"      |
| height="143"}](/media/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/cvs_compare.gif)\         |
| Figure 3. Comparing a local file to an older version in CVS--click    |
| image for full-size screen shot                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

CVS integration is available in many modern code editors, including
`emacs`, `vim`, and BBEdit, as well as graphical IDEs such as Eclipse
and Komodo Pro. Subversion integration is available as a plugin for
Eclipse; Komodo Pro supports Perforce and Subversion.

#### [A Code-Assist Editor]{#Code-assist}

Suppose that you have just typed in an object reference and want to call
a method on the object, but you are not sure what the method name is.
Wouldn't it be nice if the editor popped up a menu listing all of the
methods available for that object? It might look something like Figure
4.

![automatic code
completion](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/auto_completion.gif){width="399"
height="335"}\
*Figure 4. Automatic code completion*

In this example, the IDE is able to figure out which class the object
`$q` is an instance of and lists the names of the available methods. If
you type a `p`, then the list shows only the method names beginning with
`p`. If you type `pa`, then the list shows only the `param()` and
`parse_params()` methods.

#### [Excellent Refactoring Support]{#refactoring_support}

The easier it is to do refactoring, the more often people will do it.
The following list contains the most common refactorings. Your personal
list will probably be a little different. All of these are things you
can do "manually," but the idea is to make them into one or two-click
operations so that you will do them much more often. (For a extensive
list of refactoring operations, see [Martin Fowler's alphabetical list
of refactorings](http://www.refactoring.com/catalog/).)

##### [Extract Subroutine/Method]{#Extract_SubroutineMethod}

The IDE should create a new subroutine using the selected code and
replace the selected code with a call to the new subroutine, with the
proper parameters. Here's an example of using the Extract Subroutine
refactoring from Eclipse/EPIC (which uses the
[Devel::Refactor](http://search.cpan.org/dist/Devel-Refactor/) module).

First, you select a chunk of code to turn into a new subroutine, and
then select Extract Subroutine from a context menu. You then get the a
dialog box asking for the name of the new subroutine (shown in Figure
5).

![code before Extract Subroutine
refactoring](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/extract_subroutine_before.gif){width="500"
height="329"}\
*Figure 5. Code before Extract Subroutine refactoring*

The IDE replaces the selected code with a call to the new subroutine,
making reasonable guesses about the parameters and return values (Figure
6). You may need to clean up the result manually.

![code after Extract Subroutine
refactoring](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/extract_subroutine_after.gif){width="500"
height="45"}\
*Figure 6. Code after Extract Subroutine*

Figure 7 shows the new subroutine created by the IDE. In this case, it
needs no changes, but sometimes you will need to adjust the parameters
and/or return value(s).

![the new subroutine created by Extract
Subroutine](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/extract_subroutine_newsub.gif){width="314"
height="241"}\
*Figure 7. The new subroutine created by Extract Subroutine*

Ideally, the editor should prompt you to replace similar chunks of code
with calls to the new subroutine.

##### [Rename Subroutine/Method]{#Rename_SubroutineMethod}

The IDE should find all the calls to the subroutine throughout your
project and offer to change them for you. You should be able to see a
preview of all of the places a change could occur, and to accept or
reject each one on a case-by-case basis. The action should be undoable.

##### [Rename Variable]{#Rename_Variable}

Like Rename Subroutine, this feature should find all occurrences
throughout the project and offer to make the changes for you.

##### [Change Subroutine/Method Signature]{#Change_SubroutineMethod_signature}

The IDE should be able to make reasonable guesses about whether each
subroutine or method call is supplying the proper parameters. Partly
this is to enable the [real-time syntax checking mentioned
above](?page=2#Syntax-checking), and partly this is to enable you to
select a subroutine declaration and tell the IDE you want to refactor it
by adding or removing a parameter. The IDE should then prompt you for
the change(s) you want to make, do its best to find all of the existing
calls to the subroutine, and offer to correct the subroutine calls to
supply the new parameters.

Obviously, this is an especially tricky thing to do in Perl, where
subroutines fish their parameters out of `@_`. So the IDE would have to
look carefully at how the code uses `shift`, `@_`, and `$_[]` in order
to have a reasonable guess about the parameters the subroutine is
expecting. In many common cases, though, a Perl IDE could make a
reasonable guess about the parameters, such as in the following two
examples, so that if you added or removed one, it could immediately
prompt you about making corrections throughout the project:

    sub doSomething {
        my $gender = shift;
        my $age    = shift;
        # Not too terribly hard to guess that $gender and $age are params
    }

    sub anotherThing {
        my ($speed,$direction) = @_;
        # No magic needed to guess $speed and $direction are params.
    }

##### [Move Subroutine/Method]{#Move_SubroutineMethod_to_different}

This refactoring operation should give you a list or dialog box to
choose the destination file in your project. The IDE should allow you to
preview all of the changes that it would make to accomplish the move,
which will include updating a call to the subroutine/method to use the
proper class. At a minimum, the IDE should show you or list all of the
calls to the subroutine so you can make the appropriate changes
yourself. Ideally, the IDE should make a guess about possible
destinations; for example, if `$self` is a parameter to the method being
moved, then the IDE might try assuming the method is an object
(instance) method and initially only list destination classes that
inherit from the source class, or from which the source class inherits.

##### [Change a Package Name]{#Change_package_name}

As with Rename Subroutine and Rename Variable, when changing a package
name, the IDE should offer to update all existing references throughout
your project.

#### [Tree View and Navigation of Source Files and Resources]{#Tree_view_of_source}

Another useful feature of good IDEs is being able to view all of the
code for a project, or multiple projects, in a tree format, where you
can "fold" and "unfold" the contents of folders. All of the modern
graphical IDEs support this, even with multiple projects in different
languages.

Being able to view your project in this manner gives you both a
high-level overview and the ability to drill down into specific files,
and to mix levels of detail by having some folders show their contents
and some not.

For example, Figure 8 shows a partial screen shot from ActiveState's
Komodo IDE.

![tree view of code in
Komodo](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/komodo_code_tree.gif){width="204"
height="318"}\
*Figure 8. Tree view of code in Komodo*

#### [Support for Creating and Running Unit Tests]{#support_for_unit_tests}

Anyone who has installed Perl modules from CPAN has seen unit
tests--these are the various, often copious, tests that run when you
execute the `make test` part of the installation process. The vast
majority of CPAN modules include a suite of tests, often using the
[Test::Harness](http://search.cpan.org/dist/Test-Harness) and/or
[Test::More](http://search.cpan.org/dist/Test-Simple) modules. A good
IDE will make it very easy to both create and run unit tests as you
develop your project.

The most basic form of support for unit tests in an IDE is simply to
make it easy to execute arbitrary scripts from within the IDE. Create a
*test.pl* for your project and keep adding tests to it or to a *t/*
subdirectory as you develop, and keep running the script as you make
changes. All modern IDEs provide at least this minimal capability.

A more sophisticated level of support for unit tests might resemble the
Java IDE feature for tests written in JUnit, where you can select an
existing class file (a *.pm* file in Perl) and ask the IDE to create a
set of stub tests for every subroutine in the file. (See
[JUnit](http://www.junit.org/) and the Perl module `Test::Unit` for more
on unit tests.) Furthermore, the IDE should support running a set of
tests and giving simple visual feedback on what passed/failed. The
standard approach in the JUnit world is to show either a "green bar"
(all passed) or "red bar" (something failed) and then allow you to see
details on failures. Other nice-to-have features include calculating
code-coverage, providing statistical summaries of tests, etc.

Figure 9 shows a successful run of a Java test suite with Eclipse.

![JUnit test run,
success](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/unit_tests_success.gif){width="339"
height="199"}\
*Figure 9. A successful JUnit test run*

Figure 10 shows the same test run, this time with a failure.

![JUnit test run, with a
failure.](/images/_pub_2005_08_25_tools/unit_tests_failure.gif){width="339"
height="222"}\
*Figure 10. A JUnit test run with a failure*

A stack trace of the failure message appears in another part of the
window (cropped out here to save space). If you double-click on the test
that failed (`testInflate`), the IDE will open the file (`BalloonTest`,
in this case) and navigate to the test function.

The central idea is that the IDE should make it as painless as possible
to add and modify and run tests, so you will do more of it during
development.

#### [Language-Specific Help]{#Language-specific_help}

This is a fairly straightforward idea--the IDE should be able to find
and display the appropriate documentation for any keyword in your code,
so if you highlight `push` and ask for help, you should see the `push`
entry from the Perl documentation. If you highlight a method or
subroutine or other symbol name from an imported module, the IDE should
display the module's documentation for the selected item. Of course,
this requires that the documentation be available in a consistent,
machine-readable form, which is only sometimes true.

#### [Debugger with Real-Time Display of Results]{#Debugger}

All modern IDEs offer support for running your code under a debugger,
usually with visual display of what's going on, including the state of
variables. The [Komodo IDE supports debugging Perl that is running
either locally or
remotely](http://aspn.activestate.com/ASPN/docs/Komodo/3.1/komodo-doc-debugperl.html#debugperl_top).

Typical support for debugging in an IDE includes the ability to set
breakpoints, monitor the state of variables, etc. Basically, the IDE
should provide support for all of the features of the debugger itself.
Graphical IDEs should provide a visual display of what is going on.

#### [Automatic Code Reformatting]{#Automatic_reformatting}

This means automatically or on-demand re-indenting and other
reformatting of code. For example, when you cut and paste a chunk of
code, the IDE should support reformatting the chunk to match the
indentation of its new location. If you change the number of spaces or
tabs for each level of indentation, or your convention for the placement
of curly braces, then the IDE should support adjusting an entire file or
all files in your project.

#### [Seamless Handling of Multiple Languages]{#handling_of_multiple_languages}

Many large software projects involve multiple languages. This is almost
universally true in the case of web applications, where the user
interface typically uses HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, and the back end
uses one or more of Perl, PHP, Java, Python, Ruby, etc. It is very
helpful to have development tools that seamlessly integrate work done in
all of the languages. This is becoming quite common. For example, both
Komodo and Eclipse support multiple languages.

#### [Automated Building and Testing]{#Automated_build_and_test}

This feature can be very basic by making it easy to run an arbitrary
script from within the IDE and to see its output. This could be as
simple as having the IDE configured to have a one-click way of running
the traditional Perl module build-and-test commands:

    $ perl Makefile.PL
    $ make
    $ make test

A more advanced version of this feature might involve having the IDE
create stub code to test all of the subroutines in an existing file, or
to run all of the scripts in a specified directory under
`Test::Harness`, or to run a set of tests using
[Test::Unit::TestRunner](http://search.cpan.org/perldoc/Test::Unit::TestRunner)
or
[Test::Unit::TkTestRunner](http://search.cpan.org/perldoc/Test::Unit::TkTestRunner).
(The latter provides a GUI testing framework.)

### Conclusion and Recommendations

While there are many tools for helping Perl development, the current
state of the Perl toolbox is still years behind those of other
languages--perhaps three to five years behind, when compared to Java
tools. While there are several tools for Java that have all the features
described above, virtually none for Perl have all of them. On the other
hand, things are looking up; they are better now than a year ago. It's
possible to close that gap in a year or two.

A couple of obvious areas where improvements could be somewhat easy are
adding more features to EPIC and Komodo. EPIC is open source, so there
is potentially a wider pool of talent that could contribute. On the
other hand, Komodo has a company with money behind it, so people
actually get paid to improve it. Hopefully both tools will get better
with time.

Another interesting possibility is the development of new IDEs or adding
to existing ones by using [Adam Kennedy's PPI
module](/pub/a/2005/06/09/ppi.html), which provides the ability to parse
Perl documents into a reasonable abstract syntax tree and to manipulate
the elements and re-compose the document. There is a [new Perl editor
project, VIP, that is in the design
stages](http://search.cpan.org/dist/Text-Editor-Vip/) and is intended to
be "pluggable" and to have special features to support pair programming.

Finally, I've gathered a couple of lists of links for related material.
The first list below consist of IDEs and graphical editors for Perl, and
the second list consists of various related articles and websites. I
hope this is all inspirational and helpful.

### Current IDEs for Perl

The listed IDEs support Perl. The list is undoubtedly incomplete, but
should form a good starting point for anyone wishing to look into this
further.

-   [Affrus](http://www.latenightsw.com/affrus/)

    Perl only, Mac OS X only. Closed source (and hence not extensible by
    users). Primarily designed for CGI and standalone scripts. Free demo
    available. \$99 to purchase. (See the [Perl.com review of
    Affrus](/pub/a/2004/05/14/affrus.html) to learn more.)

-   [Eclipse/EPIC](http://e-p-i-c.sf.net/)

    EPIC is a plugin for the [Eclipse
    platform](http://www.eclipse.org/). Eclipse is open-source and cross
    platform (Windows/Mac/Linux/Solaris, etc.). Once you have Eclipse
    installed, [install the EPIC plugin from within the Eclipse
    application](http://e-p-i-c.sf.net/updates) using the [EPIC update
    URL](http://e-p-i-c.sf.net/updates/). Eclipse supports Java, and
    with plugins, C/C++, COBOL, Perl, PHP, UML2, Python, Ruby, XML, and
    more. There is a large and active community around Eclipse.

-   Emacs is the mother of all
    text-editor/development-environment/adventure-game/all-in-one tools.
    Expert programmers use it widely and there are numerous enhancements
    for working with particular languages, including, of course, Perl.
    [Emacs, with
    CPerlMode](http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/CPerlMode), is a
    richly featured IDE for Perl, albeit a non-GUI IDE (which, for some
    people, makes it even better). [A set of extensions for CPerlMode
    are available](http://groups.yahoo.com/group/extremeperl/files/) but
    you need to join the Yahoo Extreme Perl group to get to them.
-   [Komodo](http://www.activestate.com/Products/Komodo/)

    This runs on Linux, Solaris, and Windows. Free demo; \$29.95 for
    personal and student use, \$295 for commercial use. It supports
    Perl, PHP, Python, Tcl, and XSLT.

-   [PAGE](http://www.elora.hostings.com/SOFTWARE/page/)

    PAGE runs only on Windows (9x/ME/NT/2000/XP). It is a Rapid
    Application Development tool for Perl and comes in three versions:
    Free, Standard (\$10), and Enterprise (\$50). PAGE provides a
    several "wizards" for creating scripts, modules (packages), web
    forms, and even database applications.

-   [Perl Editor](http://www.enginsite.com/Perl.htm)

    This closed source program runs only on Windows (9x/NT/2000/XP). It
    has a GUI code profiler, and the Pro version has a regular
    expression tester and built-in web server (for CGI testing, etc.).
    Perl Editor claims to have the best debugger on the market. It also
    comes with GUI tools for managing MySQL databases. \$69.95 to
    purchase.

-   [`vim`](http://vim.sourceforge.net/)

    The well-known descendent of `vi` is a powerful and flexible text
    editor with many plugins and extensions. Have a look at the [`vim`
    scripts](http://vim.sourceforge.net/); for example,
    [vim.sourceforge.net/scripts/script.php?script\_id=556](http://vim.sourceforge.net/scripts/script.php?script_id=556)
    and
    [vim.sourceforge.net/scripts/script.php?script\_id=281](http://vim.sourceforge.net/scripts/script.php?script_id=281).

-   [visiPerl](http://www.helpconsulting.net/visiperl/)

    This is a closed source application that runs on Win9x/NT/2000. It
    handles Perl and HTML and has code templates, being designed for
    website building. visiPerl includes a built-in web server for
    testing and an FTP client for code deployment. There is a free demo,
    or you can purchase it for \$59.

### Related Topics

-   [A conversation about Test-Driven
    Development](http://www.artima.com/intv/testdriven.html)
-   "[Automated Testing With
    Perl](http://www.petdance.com/perl/automated-testing/)," Andy
    Lester's presentation on doing automated testing in Perl
-   [Extreme Perl book](http://www.extremeperl.org/bk/home)
-   [Extreme Perl mailing
    list](http://groups.yahoo.com/group/extremeperl/)
-   [eXtreme Programming FAQ](http://www.jera.com/techinfo/xpfaq.html)
-   [Manifesto for Agile Software
    Development](http://agilemanifesto.org/)
-   "[Parse Perl Independently](/pub/a/2005/06/09/ppi.html)," an article
    about Adam Kennedy's PPI module
-   [testdriven.com](http://www.testdriven.com/)
-   [JUnit](http://www.junit.org/)
-   Jon Udell's article on "[Tools for Dynamic
    Languages](http://weblog.infoworld.com/udell/2005/05/23.html#a1236)"
-   [Refactoring home page](http://www.refactoring.com/)
-   [XProgramming.com](http://www.xprogramming.com/): Resources for and
    about Agile Software Development


