{
   "description" : " We continue our series on the People Behind Perl by interviewing Artur Bergman. Artur is a recent addition to the legion of Perl developers, but he's already making extremely big waves. Artur picked up the gauntlet of the new...",
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2001_08_01_artur/111-perlthread.jpg",
   "date" : "2001-08-01T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/08/01/artur.html",
   "title" : "People Behind Perl : Artur Bergman",
   "draft" : null,
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "simon-cozens"
   ],
   "tags" : [
      "people-behind-perl-artur-bergman-arthur"
   ],
   "categories" : "Community"
}





We continue our series on the People Behind Perl by interviewing Artur
Bergman. Artur is a recent addition to the legion of Perl developers,
but he's already making extremely big waves. Artur picked up the
gauntlet of the new threading model introduced in Perl 5.6.0 and has set
about making it usable for the ordinary Perl programmer. Here's what
Artur has to say.

### Who are you, and what is your day job?

My name is Artur Bergman. I work on a content management system as a
system developer/designer at Contiller AB in Sweden. I am usually found
on \#perl, which is also my only real longstanding contact with the Perl
community.

I used to work with Stock Exchange systems, and have designed and
programmed a number of trade execution engines in Perl for both stocks,
power and interest-rate markets.

### How long have you been programming in Perl?

Since '95. I needed to make a Web page dynamic, so I had to learn a
programming language; it ended up being Perl.

### What got you into Perl?

My online friends recommended me to use Perl. I had tried Basic (of
course) and C, but I didn't stick with them.

### Why do you still prefer Perl? What other languages apart from Perl do you program in, and how do they compare?

Perl does what I want with a minumum of fuss. I can generally write nice
clean code, but when I need to do something clever or impossible I can
still do it. I feel like I am making steady progress while programming
Perl.

Currently the only other language I use is C; it doesn't compare! I
wouldn't dream of using C for most stuff I do in Perl; I do dream of
using `Inline::C` to optimize some stuff - I rarely do but it happens.

### What sort of things do you do with Perl now? What was the last Perl program you wrote?

Content Mangement, which generally means dealing with text. The last
Perl program I wrote was a OODBMS that is based on BerkeleyDB complete
with transactions, version and release management, scheduled tasks and
monitors. It uses POE, of course.

### What got you into Perl development?

I was getting bored. I needed a chellange! I also wanted to refresh my C
knowledge. Perl is a very interesting project to work on: the great
range of platforms it supports, the large source and the very
intelligent people working on it. I have learned a lot during the past
three months,

### Do you remember the first patch you submitted? Was it applied?

I do not remember it, but yes it was applied and Richard Soderberg found
it for me; it was a tiny documentation patch a couple of years ago.

### What do you do for Perl development now?

Mainly threading. I have released two modules on CPAN (`threads` and
`threads::shared`) that give access to Perl's newer threading system. To
make these work I have had to add some stuff to how Perl deals with
threads. I am also starting to get involved into attribute stuff, and in
my threads path I have stumbled over the regex/Perl interface and been
working on making it work better. More work will surely be done in this
area.

### Why do you work particularly with threads?

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| People Behind Perl                                                    |
|                                                                       |
| Interested in reading more from our series of interviews with Perl    |
| luminaries? Read our [discussion with Nathan                          |
| Torkington](/pub/a/2001/07/03/nat.html), a long-time Perl developer   |
| and mainstay of the Perl community.                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Because I have a real need for threads. I have a system that ideally
should scale on a SMP system, it should also work both with Win32 and
Unix. I am not a great fan of `fork()`, so I want threads. As Gurusamy
Sarathy already provided a lot of the work on `USEITHREADS`, I decided
to try to finish it.

I am very interested in concurrency issues and have worked on and with
POE quite a lot.

### People often say that threading in Perl is unusable. What do you say to that, and how is it getting better?

Sure, tell that to all the people who use `fork()` on Win32 for all
kinds of stuff!

Actually, I agree. 5.6.1 is very unusable for all kind of complex
applications with a lot of external APIs; it is unusable for people on
unsafe C libraries. (From what I have been told, Win32 and Digital Unix
have safe C libraries, so that might explain why it works better in
Win32).

The main problem has been the regex interface and match variables. This
has now been solved. A lot of bugs have been fixed and I think 5.8 will
be safe enough to start developing applications that are multithreaded.
Of course, some people have been working on multithreaded applications
since 5.5.3!

### What do you envisage Perl 6's threading model to look like?

*We conducted this interview before the State of the Onion, in which
Larry confirmed that the threading model would look like ithreads -
Simon.*

Something very similar to `threads.pm`/ithreads. I like the idea of only
sharing what is explicitly declared to be shared. I think the idea could
be taken a stop further, and only guarantee the value of shared
variables after a synchronization.

### Finally, what's the best thing about Perl and what's the worst thing about Perl?

Perl is fun, Perl has CPAN! Bad things? I would like an optional strict
typing system.


