{
   "draft" : null,
   "tags" : [],
   "date" : "2001-08-09T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/08/p6pdigest/20010809",
   "title" : "This Fortnight In Perl 6 (July 22 - Aug. 4, 2001)",
   "description" : "Notes Table of Contents &#149;The Perl Conference 5.0 &#149;The Perl 5 Porters Meeting &#149;The State Of The Onion &#149;The P 6 Q &amp; A &#149;Sarathy Speaks &#149;The Opcode BOF &#149;The Mailing Lists You can subscribe to an email version of...",
   "categories" : "community",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "bryan-warnock"
   ],
   "image" : null
}





### [Notes]{#Notes}

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Table of Contents                                                     |
|                                                                       |
| •[The Perl Conference 5.0](#The_Perl_Conference_50)\                  |
| \                                                                     |
| •[The Perl 5 Porters Meeting](#The_Perl_5_Porters_Meeting)\           |
| \                                                                     |
| •[The State Of The Onion](#The_State_Of_The_Onion)\                   |
| \                                                                     |
| •[The P 6 Q & A](#The_P_6_Q__A)\                                      |
| \                                                                     |
| •[Sarathy Speaks](#Sarathy_Speaks)\                                   |
| \                                                                     |
| •[The Opcode BOF](#The_Opcode_BOF)\                                   |
| \                                                                     |
| •[The Mailing Lists](#The_Mailing_Lists)\                             |
| \                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
|                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an
empty message to <perl6-digest-subscribe@netthink.co.uk>.

Please send corrections and additions to <bwarnock@capita.com>.

My apologies, again, for the lack of a summary recently. My last one,
covering July up to the beginning of The Perl Conference, was apparently
lost in the shuffle or the noise that was TPC, because it never made its
way to the list or [perl.com](/). And fool that I am, I didn't bug Simon
about it, fearing I would be burdening an already overloaded schedule
(shades of [Warnock's
Dilemma](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Misc/dilemma.html)). But have
no fear. If you've a penchant for ancient history, you can find it
[here](http://members.home.com/bcwarno/Perl6/digests/perl6_200107_02.html)
in my personal archive.

As far as current news, there were 120 messages across 28 threads, with
34 authors contributing, most of which occurred the week following the
conference.

### [The Perl Conference 5.0]{#The_Perl_Conference_50}

Despite accounts to the contrary, Perl 6 actually played a very small
role in the production that was The Perl Conference.

This isn't a bad thing, mind you. Perl 6 still exists only in the minds
of a few select individuals, and it would make a very uninteresting
conference to have tutorials and sessions based on a language that
doesn't exist, and is still in flux. Thus, with a few exceptions, TPC
was geared around the here-and-now of Perl 5.

Perl 6..., well, who cares anything about Perl 6?

But Larry didn't recant last year's proclamation, and Jon Orwant didn't
throw mugs asking why we were working on a new version when there was so
much interest in the old.

So Perl 6 moves on. Slowly but surely. In no hurry. And so, a brief
overview of what *did* happen at TPC with Perl 6.

#### [The Perl 5 Porters Meeting]{#The_Perl_5_Porters_Meeting}

Before the conference even started, the attending Perl 5 Porters got
together for a business meeting (of sorts), to talk about the past,
present, and future of Perl. Nat Torkington was kind enough to allow me
to attend, and there was a long enough break in the Perl 5 action for he
and Dan Sugalski to
[summarize](http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg61438.html)
what has been done so far for Perl 6.

#### [The State Of The Onion]{#The_State_Of_The_Onion}

Larry's State Of The Onion was all Perl 6, or at least what he could get
out 55 seconds at a time. It was, we hope, a preview of some upcoming
[Apocalypses](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/apocalypse/). You can read Simon
Cozen's review [here](/pub/a/2001/07/25/onion.html), and Nat announced
an MP3 recording of it on
[perl5-porters](http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg61850.html).

#### [The P 6 Q & A]{#The_P_6_Q__A}

Larry, Nat, Dan, Simon, Damian Conway, and Chip Salzenberg led a session
for the general public, iterating what has been done (
[Topaz](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/talks/),
[RFC](http://dev.perl.org/rfc/)s, etc.), and what is left to do.

#### ['Being Dan Sugalksi']{#Being_Dan_Sugalksi}

Folks were later able to get a glimpse at the inside of Perl 6 through
the eyes of Dan, who is heading up the internals effort. His slides can
be found [here](http://dev.perl.org/perl6/talks/).

#### [Sarathy Speaks]{#Sarathy_Speaks}

Perl 5.6 pumpking Gurusamy Sarathy finished the week with his vision of
what Perl 6 should be. It was a much different perspective from the ones
pitched before, as it was based on what he sees as the problems in Perl
5, untainted by the Perl 6 process (which he has not been following).

In some cases, there was complete overlap (garbage collection and more
pluggable components, for instance); in others, a different perspective
(heavier reliance on facilities provided by the underlying architecture
- physical or virtual - instead of rolling our own).

#### [The Opcode BOF]{#The_Opcode_BOF}

Dan, Simon, and I attended Uri Guttman's Op Code BOF to try to flesh out
more details of the op code and event dispatch loop. Gurusamy and newly
appointed pumpking Hugo van der Sanden also sat in.

The meeting was short and vociferous. About the only major idea added to
Dan's current
[PDD](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg03343.html)
was a prioritization scheme for event handling. No notes are posted
anywhere, so the following comes from my own scribblings:

> Events will be priority based, much like a real CPU. System events -
> signals, etc. - will naturally have a higher priority than user
> events. The opcode dispatch loop will check for events after each
> opcode, and if there are queued events at a higher level than our
> current state, the opcode loop will exhaust them. (That prevents
> events from interrupting themselves, since the event handlers
> themselves will consist of opcodes, between which events will be
> checked for.)

Obviously, there are still a lot of details to be worked out, but that
was the plan at the time.

### [The Mailing Lists]{#The_Mailing_Lists}

#### [Opcode Dispatch, Continued]{#Opcode_Dispatch_Continued}

(6 posts) In blatant defiance of Knuth, I decided to
[test](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg03361.html)
some of the ideas from opcode discussions of past and present, and coded
a couple variations of dispatchers to get a feel for performance.
Following some suggestions from Nick Ing-Simmons and Dan Sugalski,
testing continues.

#### [Module Versioning]{#Module_Versioning}

(12 posts) I also did a [brain
dump](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg03359.html)
of some ideas on module versioning. There was some brief discussions on
what could (and couldn't) and should (and shouldn't) be done. Bart
Lateur pointed everyone to an [old
message](http://groups.google.com/groups?as_umsgid=8sverk%244k3%241%40charm.magnus.acs.ohio-state.edu)
from Ilya Zakharevich, where he suggested a potential solution to the
conflicting DLL issue.

Interestingly enough, a similar discussion [took
place](http://archive.develooper.com/perl5-porters@perl.org/msg61897.html)
on perl5-porters at about the same time.

#### [Coding Conventions]{#Coding_Conventions}

(1 post) Dave Mitchell released an
[update](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg03372.html)
for his PDD on Perl coding conventions and guidelines.

#### [Adding Methods To Builtins]{#Adding_Methods_To_Builtins}

(1 post) Brent Dax
[suggested](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg07929.html)
a method (no pun intended) for adding methods to the builtin types.

#### [If Then Else Otherwise]{#If_Then_Else_Otherwise}

(22 posts) Raptor
[started](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg07930.html)
a thread that began with a specialized conditional block construct tuned
to the return values of `<=> and cmp` called `if-else-otherwise`, and
later shortened to `?::`. Once the participants worked past the actual
syntax of his proposal, it was clear that he was looking for some form
of computed goto, a la FORTRAN's arithmetic conditional, `IFA`. There
were plenty of examples of how many different ways you could accomplish
the same in Perl 5.

(7 posts) David Nicol then
[extrapolated](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg07966.html)
this into a generic macro language proposal for Perl 6.

#### [Circular References]{#Circular_References}

(10 posts) Ilya Sterin
[asked](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg07962.html)
about the difficulty in solving the circular reference problem, which
several folks kindly answered.

Now's a good time to re-advertise that Perl 6 will have a better garbage
collection system.

#### [Properties, Again]{#Properties_Again}

(12 posts) I had to go and
[revisit](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg07975.html)
some potential problems in the (currently proposed) property mechanism.
Dan quietly pointed out that Damian and Larry were working on it.

#### [Documentation]{#Documentation}

(9 posts) Adam Turoff
[explained](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-meta@perl.org/msg00965.html)
a little about the Perl Documentation Project - a project similar to the
Linux Documentation Project. He will speak more on this later.

### [Last Words]{#Last_Words}

One of the recurring Perl 6 questions at TPC was documentation. "The
Apocalypse and Exegesis series are nice, but is there a complete picture
of what Perl 6 is going to look like?"

Soon, there will be. I'm working on two forms of "snapshots" of what
Perl 6 is, in parallel with Larry's pronouncements and various
implementations being done. The first is to be a dull, dry, boring,
reference document, which will briefly describe the current feature set
of Perl 6, and how it ties to the internals. The second will be a Perl 6
version of the existing PODs - or at least all the ones that make sense.
As Larry and Damian leak various tidbits of Perl 6, I'll update those
documents to add any new features, or rip out dead Perl 5 ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Bryan C. Warnock](mailto:bwarnock@capita.com)


