{
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " \"The Effort to Write Perl 6 Has Begin In Earnest\" Before Stuck How? Tuesday What About Perl 6? Questions Will Perl 6 be in C++? When can we expect the grand plan? Will Perl 6 have a spec? Will...",
   "title" : "Report on the Perl 6 Announcement",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "mark-jason-dominus"
   ],
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2000/07/perl6",
   "tags" : [],
   "date" : "2000-07-25T00:00:00-08:00"
}





\
[]{#__index__}
["The Effort to Write Perl 6 Has Begin In
Earnest"](#the%20effort%20to%20write%20perl%206%20has%20begun%20in%20earnest)
-   [Before](#before)
-   [Stuck How?](#stuck%20how)
-   [Tuesday](#tuesday)

[What About Perl 6?](#what%20about%20perl%206)
-   [Questions](#questions)
-   [Will Perl 6 be in C++?](#will%20perl%206%20be%20in%20c++)
-   [When can we expect the grand
    plan?](#when%20can%20we%20expect%20the%20grand%20plan)
-   [Will Perl 6 have a spec?](#will%20perl%206%20have%20a%20spec)
-   [Will you look into technical infrastructure to support more
    constructive discussion than mailing lists
    can?](#will%20you%20look%20into%20technical%20infrastructure%20to%20support%20more%20constructive%20discussion%20than%20mailing%20lists%20can)
-   [Can you hint at some of the language
    changes?](#can%20you%20hint%20at%20some%20of%20the%20language%20changes)
-   [One problem of language translation is that you lose comments and
    formatting.](#one%20problem%20of%20language%20translation%20is%20that%20you%20lose%20comments%20and%20formatting.)
-   [Is there a possibility of getting a `switch`
    construction?](#is%20there%20a%20possibility%20of%20getting%20a%20switch%20construction)
-   [Will there be an ISO or ANSI standard for
    Perl?](#will%20there%20be%20an%20iso%20or%20ansi%20standard%20for%20perl)
-   [How long have you been thinking about
    this?](#how%20long%20have%20you%20been%20thinking%20about%20this)
-   [What about POD?](#what%20about%20pod)
-   [Which languages will you borrow from this
    time?](#which%20languages%20will%20you%20borrow%20from%20this%20time)
-   [Some people using Perl to develop large software want features like
    strong type checking. Is there a possibility of providing
    this?](#some%20people%20using%20perl%20to%20develop%20large%20software%20want%20features%20like%20strong%20typechecking.%20is%20there%20a%20possibility%20of%20providing%20this)

[Other Resources](#other%20resources)
[Editorial Conclusion](#editorial%20conclusion)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Last Monday, nobody knew that anything unusual was about to happen. On
Tuesday, the Perl 6 project started. On Wednesday, Larry announced it at
his "State of the Onion" address at the Perl conference.

Yes, it all really did happen that fast.

Several problems have seemed to beset Perl in the past year:

Infighting on p5p, the main Perl developers' list, seemed out of control
for a while, and, although the problems seem to have been solved by the
addition of refereeing (See
<http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-04/msg00574.html>
for details), several important developers had quit the list already.

But not a lot seems to have happened to Perl in the last year. The last
really interesting Perl development was probably POE, which won the
"Best New Module" award at *last* year's Perl conference. There was a
Perl 5.6 release, but most of the changes were not user-visible. There
was better support for threads (including support for `fork()` on
Windows systems, which is very impressive) and Unicode. But it's hard to
get excited about this, and it was really hard to put in, and
incomplete.

Perl development was stuck.

[Stuck How?]{#stuck how}
------------------------

There are two big problems with Perl 5.

First, the internals are extremely convoluted. It's *hard* to hack on
Perl's internals. There's a lot of accumulated cruft, and Perl 5 has
reached that stage of maturity in which it's difficult to make a change
or fix a bug without introducing some new bug. The excellent test suite
prevents the new bugs from getting into the release, of course, but it
also prevents the new feature from getting into the release.

The addition of threads, the compiler, bytecode generation, and Unicode
support is still incomplete, because none of those things were designed
into Perl 5; they are all being bolted on afterwards, and it shows.

The other big problem is thirteen years of backward compatibility
history. The porters might like to rationalize the syntax a little, or
clean up Perl's semantics, but that might break old code, and Perl is
committed to not breaking old code. We can't add a new built-in function
because it might break old code. It's extremely difficult to remove even
the most bizarre and little-used old features, because it might break
old code. Every few months, someone suggests replacing Perl's garbage
collector with a more modern one, but there are always objections from
people who have written code that assumes that the garbage collector
will always be reference-count based and that it can control when
objects will be destructed.

Technically, there's not very much "wiggle room" in the source code,
because the internals are so convoluted and difficult. And there's not
much "wiggle room" in the language itself, because of the need to
support ten-year-old Perl 2 code.

[Tuesday]{#tuesday}
-------------------

I had to miss the Tuesday meetings, because I was teaching classes. So
this part of the report is hearsay.

A meeting of the Perl 5 Porters was scheduled to take place in the
afternoon. In the morning, Chip Salzenberg held a pre-meeting for
discussion of "constitutional issues," to change the way Perl
development was run. But after a while, according to Larry, "Jon Orwant
... pointed out that it was going to be useless to invent a new
constitution if everyone was just going to say, 'Ho, hum.'" Jon
suggested that Perl try to go in a new direction, and do something new
and big; he used Napster as an example of a new, big idea. This was the
catalyst for the discussion to go in a new direction. At the end of the
the morning, the decision was made to start working on Perl 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[What About Perl 6?]{#what about perl 6}
----------------------------------------

Perl 6 will be a complete rewrite of Perl, starting from scratch. The
internals will be redesigned. Threading, Unicode, and reliable signal
handling will be designed in from the bottom up. The external API will
be cleaned up; the core will be smaller and faster, and the XS system
for extension modules will be scrapped in favor of something simpler and
cleaner. One perennial problem has been that installing a new version of
Perl has frequently broken binary compatibility with older versions and
required that all of Perl's unbundled extension modules be recompiled;
this may be fixed in Perl 6.

At the same time, the social structure behind Perl will also be
redesigned. Larry said that the perl5-porters model was not working well
any more, and led to too much talk and too little action. Perl is too
big for one person to manage, and the pumpkings burn out quickly. The
new model will probably be several separate working groups, each charged
with the design and implementation of one aspect of Perl. Larry said
that Perl 6 would be designed by the community, and not by one person,
and that with the new organization, Perl would be able to evolve into
the language that we need in 2020.

Probably most amazing was that the Porters agreed to break backwards
compatibility. As Larry said on Wednesday, the language itself needs
revision. On Wednesday, Larry mentioned several small, specific changes:

-   The `system()` function will return true on success and false on
    failure.

-   The `localtime()` function will return the four-digit year.

-   The notion of "currently selected filehandle" will probably go away.

-   Typeglobs may be eliminated.

But these are just by way of example. Larry said "We're really serious
about reinventing everything that needs reinventing." Everything is up
for discussion, and the suggestions so far have even included giving
Perl a pattern-matching system more like the one in SNOBOL.
It seems that the big technical inspiration that came out of the Tuesday
afternoon meeting was that it doesn't `have` to be backward compatible.
Perl 5, right now, can compile a Perl program into its internal syntax
tree and then uncompile the tree back into source code, using the
`B::Deparse` module. But you don't necessarily have to produce the same
source code you took in; you could instead rearrange the code to produce
a Perl 6 program to do the same thing. So the upward migration path from
Perl 5 to Perl 6 will probably be to run your code through a translator.

Larry promised not to abandon Perl 5. The 5.6 maintenance track will
continue as planned, and the 5.7 development track will eventually yield
Perl 5.8, as planned. 5.8 will be the final release of Perl 5, but it
will continue to be maintained and stable. Larry pointed out that Perl 4
had not yet gone away, and there was no reason to expect Perl 5 to go
away either. CPAN itself can serve as a test suite for Perl 6: When it
can run most of the things in CPAN, either directly or post-translation,
it's ready.

Larry said that easy things should stay easy, hard things should get
easier, and impossible things should get hard. He promised code in one
year: alpha code, but well-designed alpha code, and he called on each
person to play their part.

[Questions]{#questions}
-----------------------

At the end of Larry's announcement, Jon Orwant graciously offered to
cancel his talk on "Rebuilding Postapocalyptic Civilization with Perl"
so that Larry could have a question and answer session. These are the
questions that people asked, with Larry's answers.

**[Will Perl 6 be in C++?]{#will perl 6 be in c++}**

"Maybe."

**[When can we expect the grand
plan?]{#when can we expect the grand plan}**

Larry said that culturally, it has started already, and that we should
expect a roadmap this month. His personal goal as language designer was
to have something substantial to say by the time of his Linux Expo
keynote speech in October. But the schedule is not yet nailed down.

**[Will Perl 6 have a spec?]{#will perl 6 have a spec}**

Larry said he did not know how strict it would be, and that he was not
big on specs. He likes the reference implementation approach. He said he
wanted to particularly stress not a spec, but the development of
acceptance tests into regression and validation tests that would say
"This is Perl; this isn't." He said that this was more important than
mere verbiage.

**[Will you look into technical infrastructure to support more
constructive discussion than mailing lists
can?]{#will you look into technical infrastructure to support more constructive discussion than mailing lists can}**

Larry said that the Porters were thinking about 2-tier mailing lists
that each have a person in charge, and an RFC-like mechanism. He said
that we would be paying less attention to the "Wouldn't it be nice
if..." type of proposals, and that proposals would need to be more
formal and official.

**[Can you hint at some of the language
changes?]{#can you hint at some of the language changes}**

Larry said that everything was negotiable. He specifically mentioned
that Perl's old "formats" feature should probably be in a module instead
of in the core, and that he wanted to clean up ambiguities in the
indirect object syntax. (This question concerns whether the notation

``
            my $x = new Carrot (...);

parses as if you had written

``
            my $x = new(Carrot(...));

or as if you had written

``
            my $x = 'Carrot'->new(...);

instead. At present, this construction is rather fragile.)
Larry said that since the Porters had decided to bite the bullet of
backward incompatibility anyway and require translation of Perl 5 to
Perl 6 code, they would consider any change at all, as long as it could
be translated. He said that if 95% of all scripts could be translated
95% accurately, and if 80% of scripts could be translated 100%
accurately, that was probably good enough.

He said that the Porters wanted Perl to have all the features that other
languages say "nyah nyah" about, such as byte-compilation. He suggested
that Perl's garbage collector might be replaced with a more modern
mark-sweep garbage collector, and that object finalization might be
separated from destruction.

**[One problem of language translation is that you lose comments and
formatting.]{#one problem of language translation is that you lose comments and formatting.}**

Larry replied that `a2p`, the AWK-to-Perl translator that is bundled
with Perl, which he wrote, doesn't have this problem, and that he didn't
think that the person asking the question would need to worry about
this.

**[Is there a possibility of getting a `switch`
construction?]{#is there a possibility of getting a switch construction}**

(At this point Damian Conway shouted "I have a paper on that!")

Larry said, "Certainly." (Meaning that there certainly was a
possibility, not that there certainly would be one.) Then he said that
he would not promise one.

**[Will there be an ISO or ANSI standard for
Perl?]{#will there be an iso or ansi standard for perl}**

"We will be our own standards body."

**[How long have you been thinking about
this?]{#how long have you been thinking about this}**

"Since yesterday."

**[What about POD?]{#what about pod}**

Larry said it was all negotiable.

**[Which languages will you borrow from this
time?]{#which languages will you borrow from this time}**

"All of them."

(Then Larry said that they probably wouldn't borrow COBOL's
`IDENTIFICATION DIVISION` syntax, and that part of the reason there was
so little COBOL poetry is because it's hard to write a poem that begins
`IDENTIFICATION DIVISION`.)

He also mentioned the bytecode issue again, and said that it would be
nice to have a cleaner object-oriented interface to I/O.

**[Some people using Perl to develop large software want features like
strong type checking. Is there a possibility of providing
this?]{#some people using perl to develop large software want features like strong typechecking. is there a possibility of providing this}**

Larry said there was, and suggested a `use strict 'typechecking'`
directive, or maybe `use stricter`. He also said that perl 6 should get
rid of many of the stranger global variables, such as `$#`.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Other Resources]{#other resources}
-----------------------------------

The official web site for Perl 6 right now is
<http://www.perl.org/perl6/.> The site has a list of short-term goals, a
list of the roles that have been assigned to various people, the notes
from the Tuesday afternoon meeting, and press releases concerning Perl 5
maintenance and Perl 6 development.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Editorial Conclusion]{#editorial conclusion}
---------------------------------------------

Perl is interesting again.


