{
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2003/01/p6pdigest/20020308",
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "date" : "2003-01-08T00:00:00-08:00",
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : "Hello, and welcome to the first summary of 2003; welcome to the future. This summary covers two weeks, but they've been quiet what with Christmas and the New Year's. So, starting as usual with perl6-internals A Pile of Patches to...",
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6, weeks ending 2003-01-05",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ]
}





Hello, and welcome to the first summary of 2003; welcome to the future.
This summary covers two weeks, but they've been quiet what with
Christmas and the New Year's.

So, starting as usual with perl6-internals

#### [A Pile of Patches to the Perl 6 Compiler]{#a_pile_of_patches_to_the_perl_6_compiler}

Joseph F. Ryan submitted several patches to the Perl 6 mini-compiler,
(found in the *languages/perl6* subdirectory of your friendly
neighborhood Parrot distribution) mostly implementing the the semantics
for string and numeric literals discussed on perl6-documentation.

#### [Garbage Collection Headaches]{#garbage_collection_headaches}

Heads have been put together in an attempt to get Parrot's Garbage
Collection system working efficiently and accurately (no destroying
stuff before anyone's had a chance to use it, damn it!) It appears that
there's still a good deal of head scratching to be done in this area
(the chaps over on the LL1 list are wondering why we aren't just using
the Boehm GC system ... .)

I freely admit that GC makes my head hurt (especially as, in my current
Perl 5 project, I'm busy implementing mark and sweep collection for a
persistent object store while also making sure that my random assortment
of circular data structures has weakened references in just the right
places so that stuff gets destroyed but only when it **should** be
destroyed ... . Boy, am I looking forward to Perl 6 and not having to
worry about this stuff ever again ... .) but I I'll have a go at
summarizing the issues.

The main problem appears to be that of 'Infant mortality,' an issue that
I will now attempt to explain.

All the objects in memory can be represented as nodes in a graph, and
the pointers between those objects can be represented as edges in that
graph. The process of garbage collection involves taking a subset of
those nodes (the rootset) and freeing (or marking as freeable) all those
nodes in the graph that are unreachable from the rootset.

Now, consider a function that sets up a new PMC, specifically a PMC that
contains another PMC. The first step is to grab the memory for our new
PMC. Next, we create the contained PMC, a process that allocates more
memory ... and there's the rub. Garbage Collection can get triggered at
any point where we go to allocate more memory; unless the *containing*
PMC is reachable from the rootset then it will get freed at the point.
And that leads to badness. So the Infant Mortality problem can also be
thought of as the problem of rootset maintenance. Which is, in theory,
simple; just treat all C variables as members of the rootset. However,
in practice it isn't that simple, mostly because hardware registers
complicate the issue.

Steve Fink offered an overview of the issues and some of the possible
approaches to dealing with them, which sparked a fair amount of
discussion among those who understood the issues.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f07ba2d0834cfdf%40%5B63.120.19.221%5D>

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20021231000055.GA23896%40foxglove.digital-integrity.com>
-- Steve's overview

#### [Variable/value vtable split]{#variable/value_vtable_split}

Leo Tötsch posted a summary of where we stand on doing the
variable/value vtable split, suggesting that he wanted to start feeding
in patches soon. Mitchell N Charity supplied a handy dandy 'context'
post with links to appropriate articles, and he and Leo did a certain
amount of thrashing out of issues.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E1067FF.5030307%40toetsch.at>

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200212310239.gBV2dC524913%40vendian.org>

#### [Parrot Gets Another New Language]{#parrot_gets_another_new_language}

Ook! Jerome Quelin offered an implementation of the latest silly
language, Ook! which can be thought of as brainf.ck for librarians. Due
to insanity, the Ook! compiler is implemented in Parrot assembly, and
emits Parrot assembly, too, which led Jerome to ask for an 'eval' opcode
that Leo promised to supply -- and which Dan specced out in PDD6. All of
which led Leo to comment that, for all these languages are toys, they do
seem to be driving the implementation of important bits of Parrot.
Nicholas Clark reminded everyone that a zcode interpreter would be
another good thing to have a crack at because it would require a couple
of other really useful bits of Parrot functionality. Ook! is now in the
core.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=rt-19610-46602.16.0961486583524%40bugs6.perl.org>

#### [Returning new PMCs]{#returning_new_pmcs}

David Robins wondered what was the resolution about creating and
returning a new PMC in PMC ops that take a `PMC* dest` parameter. He and
Dan discussed it back and forth and it became apparent that Dan really
needs to get Parrot Objects defined ... .

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0212311324290.2659-100000%40davidrobins.net>

#### [Fun with PerlHash]{#fun_with_perlhash}

Jerome Quelin noticed that you couldn't delete an item from a PerlHash.
Leo fixed it. Jerome later asked how one could retrieve the keys of a
PerlHash in Parrot assembly and wondered whether there was a way to
traverse a hash. Sadly, the answer is 'not yet,' but happily Aldo
Calpini has something nearly ready for prime time.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200301021757.35942.jquelin%40mongueurs.net>

#### [GC/DOD feedback & runtime tuning]{#gc/dod_feedback_&_runtime_tuning}

Dan has been playing some test programs and has found some major issues
with resource allocation and added his stress-test programs to the
distribution so others could see whether they could see how to fix
things. Leo Tötsch (who else) made some inroads, reporting his progress
to the list as he and Dan discussed ways forward.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f17ba3a6adff185%40%5B192.168.3.1%5D>

#### [Object Semantics]{#object_semantics}

Dan posted a sketch of how Parrot was going to deal with language level
objects. And there was much rejoicing. Various people pointed out that
Dan's assumption that 'real' languages only had reference type objects
was incorrect; ruby has value types, so does smalltalk and C\# and
they're just the ones off the top of people's heads.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05200f16ba3a5968d9a6%40%5B192.168.3.1%5D>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Meanwhile in perl6-language]{#meanwhile_in_perl6language}

Not much was happening. The language folks seem to have taken their
holidays seriously; the last fortnight saw all of 76 posts.

#### [Tree-Frobbing Facilities in Perl 6]{#tree_frobbing_facilities_in_perl_6}

Rich Morin wondered what type of facilities Perl 6 would have for
monkeying about in trees, offering a discussion of the sort of thing he
wanted to do and the problems he saw with doing that in Perl 5. Michael
Schwern reckoned that "Doctor, it hurts when I do this." applied ("Well,
don't do that then") and suggested other ways to handle Rich's problem.
Simon Cozens, who should know better, made a *terrible* joke about
frobbing trees. Dave Whipp pointed out that continuations should make it
easy to treat tree traversal just like traversing any other list.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=p05200f0dba2db8832a47%40%5B192.168.254.205%5D>

#### [PRE/POST in Loops]{#pre/post_in_loops}

Arthur Bergman is this week's hero. He's busy writing **Hook::Scope**,
which will (eventually) implement Perl 6's `PRE/POST/FINALLY/CATCH` etc.
In Perl 5. Yay Arthur.

Anyway, Arthur wanted to know what happens with POST and PRE in loop
scopes. Do they get called for every iteration, or merely at the
beginning and end of the loop?

Luke Palmer reckons that POST gets executed for every iteration (NEXT
doesn't get executed on the last time through a loop.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=F41A933B-1E7E-11D7-BEB2-003065D64CBE%40cpan.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [`my int ( 1..31 ) $var` ?]{#my_int_(_1..31_)_$var_}

Murat Ünalan didn't like Damian's proposed
`my $date is  Integer(1..31);` (restricts \$date to an integer between 1
and 31) and proposed using `my int(1..31) $date` instead. He didn't like

        my int ($pre, $in, $post) is constant = (0..2);

either, proposing either of:

        my constant int ($pre, $in, $post) = (0..2);
        my int is constant ($pre, $in, $post) = (0..2);

Murat argued that 'type and property' belong together. Damian disagreed,
and pointed out that, if you *want* the specifiers close together, then
you could write:

        my ($pre, $in, $post) returns int is constant = (0..2);

I'm caricaturing (but only slightly) the rest of the discussion if I say
that the rest of the thread ran along the lines of a pantomime argument
("Oh yes it is!" ... "Oh no it isn't!"), suffice to say I don't think
either Damian or Murat convinced the other. Personally, I'm on Damian's
side -- sorry Murat.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=000001c2b32b%24c4cb0400%246a00fea9%40Platin>

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=000001c2b382%24f4bfb500%246a00fea9%40Platin>

#### [Variable Types vs. Value Types]{#variable_types_vs_value_types}

Dave Whipp wondered whether the type of a variable could vary
independently of its value. I'm not sure I understand what Dave was
driving at, which makes summarizing his post a little tricky (but I
*think* there's confusion about the meaning of 'type'; A variable has
what I will call a 'sigil type' and may also have a more specific
'declared type'. Thus, a declaration of the form `my Array $foo;`
declares a scalar (sigil type) variable which points to (contains) an
Array (declared type) object while one of the form `my  Array @foo;`
declares an array (sigil type) variable which contains a number of Array
(declared type) objects. The meaning of `my Array  %foo`.

This led into a discussion of the 'Everything is an object' principle,
but more on that next week.

<http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030103004227.16970.qmail%40onion.perl.org>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [In Brief]{#in_brief}

Leo Tötsch kept up his staggering patch generation rate. Does he ever
sleep?

Mitchell Charity supplied a script which generates a browseable list of
Parrot file names with brief descriptions, which should prove useful to
new developers who want to get a feel for the layout of Parrot. Dan
agreed, and it's in the Parrot distribution now as
*tools/dev/extract\_file\_descriptions.pl*.

Jason Gloudon got Garbage collection working on IA-64 Linux, yay Jason.

Bruce Gray sent in a bunch of cleanup and win32 patches.

On a suggestion from Mitchell N Charity, Robert Spier has started work
on getting a browseable, cross-referenced version of the Parrot source
up on perl.org and asked to be pinged in a week or two if it hasn't
happened.

Jerome also improved the debugger.

Leon 'bear of very little brain' Brocard added a couple of wishlist
items: Objects, and a 'make install' that does something sensible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Who's Who in Perl 6?]{#who's_who_in_perl_6}

**[Who are you?]{#item_who_are_you%3f}**\
:   A twenty-something coder, writer and editor who thinks it's possible
    to improve the state of software and software development.

**[What do you do for/with Perl 6?]{#item_what_do_you_do_for%2fwith_perl_6%3f}**\

:   Random stuff:

    -   argue language features with Allison, who lives very nearby
    -   proofread documentation when I'm trying to read it
    -   extending Parrot as an embedded platform for game scripting
    -   overseeing the project to turn p6d documentation into executable
        test cases

    Maybe I need a Perl 6 Test Pumpking hat ...

**[Where are you coming from?]{#item_where_are_you_coming_from%3f}**\
:   Physically, Portland, Ore., or Sebastopol, Calif.
:   Otherwise, I find that Perl 5 fits the way I think and expect Perl 6
    to do the same, only much more so.

**[When do you think Perl 6 will be released?]{#item_when_do_you_think_perl_6_will_be_released%3f}**\
:   In beta form within the next two years. Within five years, I think
    it will overtake Perl 5. (I expect a 5.12, though.)

**[Why are you doing this?]{#item_why_are_you_doing_this%3f}**\
:   Someone has to do this. I'm blessed to be in a position where I have
    some ability to give back to the community that's given me so much
    and where I have financial compensation to spend some time
    participating in this community.
:   I also believe that the way to write high-quality software is to
    take quality seriously. We have the opportunity to test Perl 6 from
    the ground up, having learned lessons and built tools for Perl 5. If
    we do our job correctly, then we'll even have tests in place before
    we have the language features in place. Hooray for test-driven
    development!

**[You have five words. Describe yourself.]{#item_you_have_5_words%2e_describe_yourself%2e}**\
:   I am not really Schwern.

**[Do you have anything to declare?]{#item_do_you_have_anything_to_declare%3f}**\
:   So this camel and parrot walk into a bar...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acknowledgements]{#acknowledgements}

Back to writing summaries on the train and in the armchair when I get
distracted by almost anything (current distractions, writing a graphical
TestRunner for the ObjcTest framework, Eliza Carthy's utterly wonderful
*Anglicana* CD and the nsNet puzzle game...). I started writing this
Monday morning damn it.

Proofreading was once more handled by Aspell and me.

Thanks to chromatic for answering the questionnaire for me. The queue
now has one (count it, one) entry left in it so please consider sending
me your answers to
*[mailto:mailto:5Ws@bofh.org.uk](mailto:mailto:5Ws@bofh.org.uk)*

If you didn't like this summary, why are you still reading it? If you
did like it, please consider one or more of the following options:

-   Send money to the Perl Foundation at
    <http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
    development of Perl 6.
-   Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open to
    all. <http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and <http://www.parrotcode.org/>
    are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing
    lists.
-   Send feedback, flames, money and/or one of those enormous new Apple
    Powerbooks to
    *[mailto:mailto:p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk](mailto:mailto:p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk)*

The fee paid for publication of these summaries on perl.com is paid
directly to the Perl Foundation.


