{
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/111-sprog.gif",
   "description" : " We've all been there-a data translation problem rears its head and you reach for your toolkit of Perl snippets. It might involve parsing a CSV file, extracting MIME attachments, generating bulk SQL insert statements, or scraping data from a...",
   "tags" : [
      "data-munging",
      "perl-for-non-programmers",
      "sprog",
      "visual-programming"
   ],
   "categories" : "Graphics",
   "authors" : [
      "grant-mclean"
   ],
   "image" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "title" : "Data Munging with Sprog",
   "slug" : "/pub/2005/06/23/sprog.html",
   "date" : "2005-06-23T00:00:00-08:00"
}





\
We've all been there--a data translation problem rears its head and you
reach for your toolkit of Perl snippets. It might involve parsing a CSV
file, extracting MIME attachments, generating bulk SQL insert
statements, or scraping data from a web application. You know you have
code lying around that'll take you halfway there, if only you could find
it. Then there's the problem of pulling it all together.

Wouldn't it be great if there was a way to catalog your code snippets?
How about a way to browse or search by keyword, a way to modularize your
code for easy reuse, and a way to document it and easily access that
documentation? Wouldn't it be even better if you could pull the pieces
together to assemble a solution without having to actually write code at
all?

Now there is. Now there's Sprog.

### The Assignment

Picture yourself as a sysadmin at Example Corp. Your boss calls you in
to say he's setting up an LDAP server and he needs you to whip up an
Lightweight Directory Interchange Format (LDIF) file, containing every
employee's name, phone number, and email account information. Oh, and he
needs it this afternoon, so you'd better get typing.

You sit back down at your desk to contemplate your fate. Who ya gonna
call? The answer hits you--the company phone list on the intranet! It
has all of the information you need (Figure 1); you just need to get it
out.

![Phone List Web
Page](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/phonelist.gif){width="500"
height="367"}\
*Figure 1. The company phone list web page*

### Getting Started

With a second flash of inspiration, you download the latest version of
[Sprog](http://sprog.sourceforge.net/). You install the Perl Gtk
bindings and a few other modest prerequisites and before you know it,
you're looking at a clean green GUI (Figure 2).

![The Sprog
Workspace](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/01_workbench.gif){width="500"
height="367"}\
*Figure 2. The Sprog workspace*

A quick scan of the palette on the left reveals something labeled
Retrieve URL, which sounds like a good start. Reading the instructions
at the bottom of the window, you learn that the thing is a gear and that
you can drag it across and drop it on the workspace.

Having dragged the gear onto the workspace, you right-click on it and
select Properties. Up pops a properties dialog (Figure 3), with a handy
box where you paste in the URL of the phone list.

![A properties
dialog](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/02_properties.gif){width="500"
height="368"}\
*Figure 3. A properties dialog*

Next, you drag across the Text Window gear from the palette and drop it
on top of the Retrieve URL gear. It snaps reassuringly into position so
that the two gears' connectors fasten together securely (Figure 4).

![Two gears connected
together](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/03_interlocked.gif){width="250"
height="94"}\
*Figure 4. Two gears connected together*

[![O'Reilly Open Source Convention
2005.](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/images/os2005/banners/120x240.gif){width="120"
height="240"}](http://conferences.oreillynet.com/os2005/)
When you click the Run button on the toolbar, the machine leaps into
life. The gears turn, it retrieves data, and a text window appears to
display the HTML of the phone list page. Okay, great, you haven't
written a line of code and already you've replicated your browser's View
Source function.

You save the machine to a file called *phonelist.sprog* and then look
for the next clue.

### Making Connections

Returning to the palette, you find a gear labelled Parse HTML Table. It
looks promising, so you drag it onto the workbench. You pull apart the
first two gears and attempt to add the new one in between them.
Unfortunately, the new gear has a funny shaped output connector and the
Text Window gear doesn't seem to fit onto it.

You right-click on the new gear and select Help. From the help page you
learn that the output connector is a list connector. The gear takes a
stream of HTML text and outputs rows of data, where each row is a list
of values plucked from adjacent table cells.

Once more, back at the palette, you discover a List To CSV gear, which
has an input connector to match the table parser and an output connector
to match the text window gear. You drag it over and snap them all
together (Figure 5).

![Machine to produce
CSV](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/04_to_csv.gif){width="250"
height="152"}\
*Figure 5. A machine to produce CSV*

Now when you run the machine again, the text window fills with lovely
CSV data. It's not that you want CSV data, of course, but at least you
can see that the machine has parsed the relevant data out from the HTML
page. Or has it?

On closer inspection, you realize that the machine has parsed the wrong
table from the HTML. In true 1998 style, the page designer used nested
tables to lay out the page. Even the list of navigation links is a
table. Oh dear!

The properties dialog for the Parse HTML Table gear allows you to
specify which table you want to parse. The help page explains that you
can enter just a number (such as 2 for the second table) or an XPath
expression. There's even an example XPath expression which you can cut
and paste to select a table based on the contents of the first cell in
the first row:

    //table[./tr[1]/th[1 and contains(text(), 'First Name')]]

As it happens, a bit of trial and error reveals that the phone list data
is in the third table, so you set the selector to `3`. Now when you run
the machine, you see exactly the data you want in beautiful CSV format
(not that you want CSV data, of course).

Hang on! The data still isn't quite right. The data values don't contain
any HTML tags, but they do seem to have lots of leading and trailing
white space and embedded newlines. Racing back to the palette, you grab
the Strip Whitespace gear, slot it into your machine and tweak its
properties to specify exactly which white space you want stripped. Now
when you run the machine again, you do get truly lovely CSV data (Figure
6).

![CSV
output](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/05_lovely_csv.gif){width="491"
height="266"}\
*Figure 6. CSV output*

Of course, there's no getting away from the fact that you still don't
want CSV data.

### What Were You Trying To Do, Again?

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| <div class="secondary">                                               |
|                                                                       |
| Did you know? Your email client can import LDIF files into your       |
| address book.                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| To import an LDIF file into your Thunderbird address book:            |
|                                                                       |
| 1.  Open your address book.                                           |
| 2.  Select Tools -&gt; Import.                                        |
| 3.  Select Address Books and then Next.                               |
| 4.  Select "Text file (LDIF ...)" and then Next.                      |
| 5.  Select the LDIF file created from Sprog and then Open.            |
| 6.  Select Finish.                                                    |
|                                                                       |
| </div>                                                                |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Remembering your original orders, you do a bit of reading about LDIF
files. Your research shows that LDIF is a fairly simple text format. You
need to generate a text file with an entry for each person separated by
blank lines and formatted something like:

    dn: uid=cat,ou=Staff,ou=People,dc=example,dc=com
    objectClass: person
    objectClass: inetOrgPerson
    cn: Catherine Trenton
    uid: cat 
    sn: Trenton
    givenName: Catherine
    mail: cat@example.com
    organizationName: Example Corp
    telephoneNumber: 555-2349
    mobileTelephoneNumber: 555-9623

This looks like a job for a template, and sure enough, you find a gear
entitled Apply Template (TT2) in the palette. The template gear's input
connector is unlike either the pipe or the list connectors you've
encountered so far. The help page tells you it's a record connector that
passes data using Perl hashes rather than arrays.

Back on the palette, you find a handy gear called "List to Record" that
automagically converts lists to records by assuming the first row
contains a column heading, which it uses for field names (hash keys).
You remove the List To CSV gear and replace it with "List to Record,"
followed by the Apply Template (TT2) gears. With a few clicks and drags,
you reassemble your machine into its "almost final" shape (Figure 7).

![Machine including template
gear](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/06_template_gear.gif){width="250"
height="207"}\
*Figure 7. Machine including template gear*

In the properties dialog for the template gear, you add a template:

    dn: uid=[% email %],ou=Staff,ou=People,dc=example,dc=com
    objectClass: person
    objectClass: inetOrgPerson
    cn: [% first_name %] [% surname %]
    uid: [% email %]
    sn: [% surname %]
    givenName: [% first_name %]
    mail: [% email %]
    organizationName: Example Corp
    telephoneNumber: [% phone %]
    mobileTelephoneNumber: [% cell %]

The results are almost exactly what you want, except that there are a
couple of places where you wanted a `uid` field and the closest you had
available was `email`. You need to strip out the `@example.com` from the
`dn` and `uid` lines. You unplug the Text Window gear and insert a "Find
and Replace" gear to fix the first occurrence (Figure 8):

![Find/replace to fix
dn](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/07_fix_dn.gif){width="340"
height="199"}\
*Figure 8. Adding a "Find and Replace" gear*

and another one to fix the second (Figure 9):

![Find/replace to fix
uid](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/08_fix_uid.gif){width="340"
height="199"}\
*Figure 9. Adding another "Find and Replace" gear*

and now the output is exactly like what you wanted (Figure 10).

![Final
output](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/09_final_output.gif){width="491"
height="330"}\
*Figure 10. Final output*

You swap out the Text Window gear for a Write File gear, select a
filename, and run the machine one last time (Figure 11).

![Final
machine](/images/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/10_final_machine.gif){width="250"
height="264"}\
*Figure 11. The final machine*

You've finished the job and you never had to touch your semicolon key
once.

### More About Sprog

I hope this article has given you some idea of what's possible with
Sprog. It can be a useful addition to the toolbox of people who write
scripts to transform data. Beyond that, though, I intend it to be a
useful tool for people who don't write scripts--*scripting for the GUI
guys*, if you will. Anyone who's smart enough to drive a spreadsheet is
smart enough to drive Sprog. It's just a different way of working with
data. Even if the only thing those people use it for is getting data
into a form their spreadsheets can handle, then that's surely useful.

Sprog is under active development, with the framework being extended and
new gears added all the time. Writing your own gears is easier than you
might imagine, and there is a mailing list to ask questions and share
your ideas.

-   [Sprog project](http://sprog.sourceforge.net)
-   [Sprog mailing
    list](http://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/sprog-users)
-   [Article example files](/media/_pub_2005_06_23_sprog/files.tar.gz)


