{
   "description" : " Slim Devices made their name in 2001 with the SLIMP3, a networked MP3 and Internet radio player. The SLIMP3 won a five-out-of-five mouse rating in Macworld magazine, and was featured in GQ magazine and on TechTV's The Screen Savers....",
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2003_12_05_slimp3/111-slimp3.gif",
   "categories" : "Community",
   "title" : "How Perl Powers the Squeezebox",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "simon-cozens"
   ],
   "draft" : null,
   "slug" : "/pub/2003/12/05/slimp3",
   "tags" : [
      "mp3",
      "perl",
      "perl-mp3",
      "slim-devices",
      "slimp3",
      "slimp3",
      "squeezebox",
      "wireless-mp3"
   ],
   "date" : "2003-12-05T00:00:00-08:00"
}





[Slim Devices](http://www.slimdevices.com/) made their name in 2001 with
the SLIMP3, a networked MP3 and Internet radio player. The SLIMP3 won a
five-out-of-five mouse rating in *Macworld* magazine, and was featured
in *GQ* magazine and on TechTV's *The Screen Savers*. This year, they're
trying to repeat the success with Squeezebox, an 802.11-enabled version.

The interesting thing about the SLIMP3 and the Squeezebox from our point
of view, though, is that the server which drives the player is written
in Perl, and developers are allowed -- in fact, encouraged -- to hack on
it and make the devices do interesting things. A [developer
community](http://www.slimdevices.com/dev_overview.html) has sprung up
around the SLIMP3, and some [interesting third-party
hacks](http://www.slimdevices.com/dev_third_party.html) have been
produced.

We caught up with Dean Blackketter from Slim Devices, who took some time
out from moving Squeezeboxes to answer a few of our questions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**perl.com: What made you decide, first of all, to write the server code
in Perl?**

**Dean**: Sean \[Adams, Slim Devices founder\] wrote the very first
version of the software in Perl because he was able to get it up and
running quickly. When I first encountered Sean and SLIMP3, I was a
little afraid of Perl, having been primarily a C and C++ programmer,
mostly because when I tried to read it, I got confused by idiomatic
usage.

I first decided to rewrite the thing in C, but I couldn't really get
started until I could read the existing code. So I bought a copy of
*Learning Perl* and read it in two evenings. Halfway through the first
chapter something clicked and I said, "That's so cool!" Then, about
every 10 pages after I'd repeat, "That's so cool!" again, but a little
louder. By the end, I was sold. At that point I dug in and started
making the software better.

**What features of Perl were particularly helpful when you were writing
the SlimServer?**

The greatest feature of Perl, for us, is that so many people know it.
Since our software is open source, we benefit from as many users as
possible being able to read and improve our code base. Anybody who's
thrown together a little Perl CGI or script is a potential contributor
to our software.

Second, the ability for us to offer our software on a wide array of
platforms (Mac OS X, Windows 98/ME/NT/2000/XP, BSD, Linux, Solaris) and
also be deployed on server appliances makes it possible for us to get
our product running as broadly as possible.

Third, even though our product's primary feature is playing back audio,
the bulk of the software really is processing text. Our built-in HTTP
server, command-line interface, device-user interface, and even music
meta-information is all text-based, and Perl is nearly the perfect
language for this.

**What issues did you have to face when considering how to distribute a
Perl-based consumer application, and how did you approach them?**

Distributing a Perl application on the traditional Unix-like platforms
(BSD, Solaris, Linux) is easy. Things got a bit harder on Mac OS X,
since command-line solutions aren't acceptable to Mac users. Initially,
I wrote a simple graphical application (in AppleScript!) that acted as a
launcher for our server software, but this was really not good enough
for Mac users. One of our Open Source contributors, Dave Nanian, came to
the rescue and built us a System Preferences pane and installer
application that work as they should on a Mac.

Windows is the hardest platform for us to support. Luckily we had
another Open Source contributor, Sam Saffron, who decided that building
a shell application for the server software would be a great way to
learn MFC, and he contributed a nice little app for this. Another
contributor, Chris Eastwood, put together an installer for us. But it
was the fine folks at [ActiveState](http://www.activestate.com/) with
their [Perl Dev Kit](http://www.activestate.com/Products/Perl_Dev_Kit/)
that really made it possible for us to release on Windows with their
PerlApp (for making Perl-based .exe files) and PerlSvc (for making
Perl-based Windows Services).

Even with all this help, Perl on Windows is different enough in subtle
ways to make it a real pain to maintain. Maybe if we had more hardcore
in-house Windows experience things would be easier, but it's a struggle.

**For consumer devices like the SLIMP3, the manufacturer has a choice
between open and hackable, and "sealed box." You guys went for the
hackable approach, GPLing the code and setting up developers' forums.
What was the rationale behind that?**

When I got into this, the total of my Open Source experience was running
a Linux server in my basement. Sean initially released the SLIMP3
software under the GPL, which made it possible for me to help out. I
quickly realized that our customers have a lot of talent and energy that
they are willing to contribute to make the product better. We're lucky
to have a business model where we can make money on the hardware and
give the software away. When our customers contribute, they make their
own SLIMP3s (and now Squeezeboxes) more valuable to themselves and make
the new units we sell to new customers more valuable as well. Everybody
wins.

**How did you go about building a developer community behind the
SlimServer project?**

I like to think that the community built itself. We provided a forum
(our discussion lists) and Sean and I participate on a daily basis;
acting on the requests, suggestions, bug reports, and patches that
people post. We're spending more effort lately setting up our own list
server and CVS system, as we had problems with our previous forums
(Yahoo Groups and SourceForge, respectively), but these will give us a
little more control of our virtual spaces.

**How do you decide which developer extensions to keep as third-party
projects and which to integrate?**

If a contribution will make the product better for a substantial portion
of our customers and won't make the product worse for any of them, then,
generally speaking, it's included. Submitted features that make the
software harder or less intuitive to use, require obscure or
platform-specific software or hardware to be installed, generally don't
make it in. Contributions that are useful to a large fraction of our
customers and don't diminish the product's ability to play back music,
make it in.

I act as final arbiter and (hopefully) benevolent dictator, and the
community has been really supportive of this.

**Finally, we notice that you've decided to donate 10 percent of your
profits to the EFF. What's the motivation behind this?**

Digital freedoms are important to the folks at Slim Devices, both
personally and at a corporate level. We've been frustrated by not being
able to offer our customers the ability to play the music that they've
bought due to digital rights management systems and onerous licensing
fees for various patents. The EFF shares our goal to free our customers'
music.

The Squeezebox is available from [Slim
Devices](http://www.slimdevices.com/) and their resellers, and the
server code can be downloaded from their [downloads
site](http://www.slimdevices.com/su_downloads.html).


