{
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "draft" : null,
   "description" : " You know how it is, you go away for a lovely weekend folk festival in Wales, you have a really good, relaxed time, singing yourself hoarse and generally forgetting all about technology before coming home to email from the...",
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "piers-cawley"
   ],
   "tags" : [
      "perl-6-internals-parrot"
   ],
   "title" : "This week on Perl 6, week ending 2003-04-20",
   "slug" : "/pub/2003/04/p6pdigest/20030420",
   "date" : "2003-04-20T00:00:00-08:00",
   "categories" : "perl-6"
}





You know how it is, you go away for a lovely weekend folk festival in
Wales, you have a really good, relaxed time, singing yourself hoarse and
generally forgetting all about technology before coming home to email
from the perl.com editor asking if he could have the summary about half
an hour ago, and then you skim through the lists and find nearly 300
messages unread? You do? I thought it was just me. So, having utterly
failed (by virtue of being elsewhere) to get a summary written by
Monday, I'm currently shooting for 'getting it written'. Welcome to this
week's Perl 6 summary; all the fun of the Perl 6 lists with none of the
tedious 'reading every message'.

Let's see if I can't ease myself back into the Perl 6 vibe by
summarizing the still rather quiet perl6-internals list first...

#### [Building Parrot on Win32]{#Building_Parrot_on_Win32}

Steve Fink has been busy committing (in the CVS rather than the
culpability sense) Mattia Barbon's patches to get Parrot building
happily in a Win32 environment. If you have such an environment, now
would probably be a good time to grab the latest Parrot from CVS and see
if it builds for you. I'm sure the list would be grateful to hear of
your experience, good or bad.

#### [PMC documentation]{#PMC_documentation}

After seemingly weeks in the wilderness with very little feedback,
Alberto Simões finally got some comments on (and thanks for) his latest
PMC doc patches from Steve Fink and Brent Dax. The docs haven't made it
into the distribution yet though, but it can only be a matter of time.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030414083708.GA1510@alfarrabio.di.uminho.pt)

#### [Is PMC size fixed?]{#Is_PMC_size_fixed?}

Mattia Barbon wanted to know if it would eventually become possible to
create PMCs with additional data members. Dan says not; PMCs are
allocated from arenas which apparently means they need to be the same
size (variable sized PMCs would mean adding complexity to the garbage
collector, which is already complicated enough thanks very much...)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Mahogany-0.64.2-628-20030415-212901.00@rbnet.it)

#### [Dan Does Design Decisions]{#Dan_Does_Design_Decisions}

Dan announced a few design decisions:

-   It's time to start assigning permanent opcode numbers to some of the
    opcodes.
-   There's some new stack ops, `halfpop[insp]`.
-   We now have `can` and `does` ops.
-   Dan explained that `can` and `does` were there to support fast
    interface polymorphism.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a0521060abac206fe31be@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)
-- permanent opcode numbers

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05210609bac203bc6e40@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)
-- halfpop

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a0521060bbac22af49f56@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)
-- can/does

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05210609bac4968b906b@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)
-- Interfaces/Classes

#### [Short-lived memory allocation]{#Short-lived_memory_allocation}

Luke Palmer wondered what the Right Way was to allocate dynamic memory
that wouldn't be needed beyond a function invocation. The answer, of
course, was 'use Parrot memory management and let Garbage Collection
work its shiny magic'. Toward the end of the thread Dan let on that
Parrots Garbage Collector is 'always going to be walking the system
stack' so there was no need to worry about anchoring the newly allocated
buffer to the root set for the duration of the function invocation,
which seems to be a new commitment. Both Dan and Steve Fink observed
that the memory documentation could use updating to clarify best
practice for everyone. Volunteers?

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=ygc65pffcoo.fsf@babylonia.flatirons.org)

#### [How deep is `clone`?]{#How_deep_is_clone?}

Alberto Simões asked how deeply the `clone` operator worked. According
to Leopold Tötsch it's a deep, recursive clone, which he noted makes for
interesting times when dealing with self referencing structures (Dan
reckoned that it shouldn't be too bad if you take advantage of the GC
system's graph traversal smarts...). Luke Palmer wondered why the
default was a deep copy as, he claimed, deep copies were seldom needed.
He wondered how to make a shallow copy. Leo suggested extending clone
with an extra parameter to specify deep or shallow copying. Dan said
that it is the way it is because he said so, and that one would make a
shallow copy with assign.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030416112524.GA9757@alfarrabio.di.uminho.pt)

#### [Shared memory]{#Shared_memory}

David Robins wondered whether Parrot's memory allocation system would
cope with sharing memory between processes and found some messages in
the archive that seemed to imply that 'it will cope eventually'. He
wondered *how* it would cope. Warnock's Dilemma applies...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=Pine.LNX.4.44.0304170912260.19245-100000@davidrobins.net)

#### [A New GC approach?]{#A_New_GC_approach?}

Kurt Stephens announced that he had a partially written 'conservative,
non-copying "treadmill"' GC system that could work in real time without
stopping the world. He wondered if it could be useful for Parrot. No
comments so far...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E9F3F20.306@kurtstephens.com)

<http://kurtstephens.com/research/index.html>

#### [IMC and variable number of arguments]{#IMC_and_variable_number_of_arguments}

K Stol wondered how to handle a variable number of function arguments in
IMC code. Dan remarked that it was covered by the Parrot calling
conventions (presumably IMC code doesn't do the dfull Parrot calling
conventions though). Leo Tötsch suggested making sure that the last
thing pushed onto the argument stack was the number of arguments, and
Will Coleda suggested passing a single PMC like a PerlArray...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=BAY1-DAV58yhJBbdbuN0000d25d@hotmail.com)

### [Meanwhile, over in perl6-language]{#Meanwhile,_over_in_perl6-language}

If I were asked to summarize this week's traffic on perl6-language with
one word, that word would be 'Types'. It turns out that thinking about
types, and how they should behave in Perl 6, is hard. I don't envy
Damian the writing of the next Exegesis, that's for sure.

Instead of presenting the threads in roughly chronological order this
week I'm going to deal with the none type related threads first and then
attempt to sketch the current issues with types without quite so much
reference to individual threads. Cover me, I'm going in...

#### [Currying questions]{#Currying_questions}

Last week, Ralph Mellor had asked whether currying assumptions could be
overridden when the curried function was called and Luke Palmer had said
he didn't think so. This week Damian answered with a rather more
authoritative "No, they can't be overridden, just make a call to the
original function.". Ralph had also wondered if there would be a way to
specify whether currying assumptions were made by binding or by copying
a value (currently, they get bound, just like they do when you call a
function normally (I wonder what happens when the function prototype
specifies `is copy`)). Damian said that, if you wanted to make an
assumption based on a copy then you needed to explicitly make that copy.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E968850.2000604@self-reference.com)
-- Ralph's original questions

#### [Are all list constructors iterators?]{#Are_all_list_constructors_iterators?}

'Marek Ph.' admired the shiny goodness that is lazy evaluation and
wondered if *all* list constructors were actually iterators. He wanted
to know if that meant that

        @a = 1 .. Inf;
        splice @a, 5, 2;

would yield

        @a == (1 .. 4, 7 .. Inf)

He also asked if the `x` operator would generate an iterator too. Luke
Palmer thought the answer to both questions was "Yes".

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200304140800.04087.philipp.marek@bmlv.gv.at)

#### [... but foo('bar')]{#..._but_foo('bar')}

Stéphane Payrard spotted a possible ambiguity in Perl 6's grammar. He
wanted to know if

        ... but foo('bar')

set the property 'foo' to the value 'bar', or did it create a property
with the name being the value returned by a function call of
`foo('bar')`. He wondered what the syntax would be to get the 'other'
meaning. Luke Palmer thought the first part was that the property 'foo'
would get set to 'bar' (so do I, unless the thing implementing the
property has some special semantics). He suggested that to force the
call to the function to get a property name one would do one of:

        ... but $(foo('bar'))

or

        ... but &foo.('bar')

I prefer the second of those two.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030414194736.GF2610@stefp.dyndns.org)

#### [Perl 6 parser questions]{#Perl_6_parser_questions}

Right at the end of last week, Austin Hastings asked a bunch of
questions about the behaviour of the Perl 6 parser. He wondered, for
instance, if, in the future, he'd be able to (usefully) say:

        #!/usr/bin/perl6.1
        use Perl6::Grammar v6.0.0.2;

Larry answered this question ("I don't see why not") and all of Austin's
other questions on this topic. Apparently the Perl 6 Parser will be
documented 'whenever Apocalypse 18 comes out'.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030413195322.44208.qmail@web12306.mail.yahoo.com)

#### [Initializations outside of control flow]{#Initializations_outside_of_control_flow}

Mark J. Reed asked about elegant ways of initializing shared variables.
He wanted something a little neater than the blunderbuss of a `BEGIN`
block. Larry obliged with one of his 'thinking aloud' posts which, while
not giving us a final answer does give us a few signposts. It's looking
like we'll have traits along the lines of:

        state $where is begin($value);
        state $where is check($value);
        state $where is  init($value);
        state $where is first($value);

Where the traits work analogously to `BEGIN`, `CHECK`, `INIT` and
`FIRST`.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030415143435.GD7176@charm.turner.com)

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030415181942.GA11245@wall.org)

#### [The new `returns` keyword]{#The_new_returns_keyword}

David Storrs was a little worried about the possible clash between the
new `returns` keyword -- introduced in Apocalypse 6 -- and `return`.
Michael Lazzaro pointed out that the 'possible clash' was almost
certainly deliberate, after all:

        sub foo returns Bar {...}

reads rather well. David had used the example `my $spot returns Dog`,
which does look rather ugly, but Michael pointed out, in the case of a
variable declaration, it made more sense to use `my $spot of Dog` or
even `my Dog $spot`. Michael commented that this choice of syntax meant
the programmer was able to pick the most readable phrase for a given
situation.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=CCE85CBE-6F72-11D7-A307-00050245244A@cognitivity.com)

#### [A17 early discussion: Perl 6 threading proposal]{#A17_early_discussion:_Perl_6_threading_proposal}

Austin Hastings posted what would once have been called an RFC about
Perl 6's threading model. No comments so far.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030415182938.6630.qmail@web12306.mail.yahoo.com)

#### [`wrap` from Synopsis 6]{#wrap_from_Synopsis_6}

David Storrs wondered if the new `.wrap` method, which returns a unique
id identifying the particular 'wrapper' could have an associated warning
if the resulting id wasn't stored somewhere. Adam D. Lopresto and Austin
Hastings weren't keen...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030416074404.A72173@megazone.bigpanda.com)

#### [The difference between `-` \$arg {...}&gt; and `sub ($arg) {...}`]{#The_difference_between_-_$arg_{...}>_and_sub_($arg)_{...}}

David Storrs asked for a 'micro-Exegesis' on the difference between `-`
\$foo {...}&gt; and `sub ($foo) {...}` since they both seemed to
generate anonymous subroutines. There were an awful lot of responses to
this. Essentially the difference is that a 'pointy block' (my coinage I
think) is just a block that has a signature. The main difference is what
happens to a `return`.

In a block or a pointy block, a `return` returns from the subroutine
that lexically contains that block, not simply from the block itself. If
you want to leave a block prematurely without returning from its
enclosing subroutine, you would use the `leave` keyword.

This distinction between a Block and a Sub allows for some rather neat
(Smalltalkish) idioms

        multi iterate_over_file( String $path: Block &block ) {
            my $fh = open File: '<', $path or
                fail "Couldn't open $path: $!";
            while <$fh> {
                &block($_);
            }
        }

        sub find_user ($user_name) {
            iterate_over_file "/etc/passwd" -> $line {
                return $line but true if /^$user_name/;
            }
            return undef;
        }

This is a somewhat contrived example, but I think it's useful as an
illustration. If a Block were exactly the same as a sub, then the
`return` in `find_user` would return to the middle of the `while` loop
in `iterate_over_file` and `iterate_over_file` would only return after
it had gone through every line in the password file, which would mean
that `find_user` would always return undef. However, a return from
inside a block returns from the subroutine *containing* the block so
`find_user` behaves as expected and we get to write powerful control
structures without having to resort to macros. I do wonder if the it
would be possible for a function like `iterate_over_file` to `CATCH` the
block's Return exception though...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030416074937.B72173@megazone.bigpanda.com)

#### [Compulsorily named parameters?]{#Compulsorily_named_parameters?}

The debate over declaring non optional named parameters continued as
Damian joining in. The current consensus appears to be that the various
optional/named/slurpy shorthands introduced in Apocalypse 6 should stay
pretty much as they are, but that it should be possible to declare more
complex parameter requirements using sensibly named traits. John
Siracusa still wants a more 'powerful' shorthand, but there doesn't seem
to be anyone taking his side on that.

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E99F811.30603@conway.org)

#### [Multimethod invocants]{#Multimethod_invocants}

Multimethods still appear to be causing some confusion, mostly to do
with how they are called and dispatched, and which method parameters
participate in the dispatch. There's a largish contingent (and I
probably my count myself a member of that contingent, spot the bias) who
would like to be able to write:

        multi infix:@ (Number $x, Number $y) { new Point: $x, $y }

        class point {
            ...
            multi make_rectangle ( Point $p ) {
                new Rectangle: $_, $p;
            }
            multi make_rectangle ( Number $x, Number $y ) {
                .make_rectangle( $x @ $y );
            }
        }

Which isn't allowed. Instead you would have to write:

        multi make_rectangle ( Point $p, Point $q ) {
            new Rectangle: $p, $q;
        }

        multi make_rectangle ( Point $p, Number $x, Number $y ) {
            make_rectangle ($p, $x @ $y);
        }

And you also have to be wary of

        my Point $p;

        ...

        $p.make_rectangle($x @ $y);

which would first try to dispatch to Point's `make_rectangle`
'unimethod', only attempting to dispatch via a multimethod if there is
no such method. Personally, I think there's room for a spoonful or two
of syntactic sugar to allow for the 'method variant' style of
declaration as well as the full on generic multimethod style (which
would, of course, underpin the more restricted method variant style).
However, if it doesn't exist out of the box I expect someone (me?) will
write a set of macros to make things work.

In the message referenced, Damian explains the current state of the
multimethod art...

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=3E99FEA8.2090009@conway.org)

### [Types...]{#Types...}

Well, that's 100 or so messages accounted for. Which leaves another 173
messages remaining all of which concern types. The problem as I see it
is that different people seem to understand different things from the
word type, and there's a lot of people talking at cross purposes as well
as a fair amount of axe grinding going on.

Now, I could just punt and write something like "Everyone except Leon
Brocard talked for ages about types. Here are the links to those
threads" which would at least has the virtue of getting the god awful
running joke out of the way, but that would smack of cheating. So, what
I'm going to do is to only cheat slightly. At the bottom of this section
you'll find links to all the threads that discussed types this week.
However, before that I'll try give you a (biased) overview of the issues
involved and the areas of confusion.

#### [An illustrative quotation from Lewis Carroll]{#An_illustrative_quotation_from_Lewis_Carroll}

> "The name of the song is called 'Haddocks' Eyes.'" \[said the White
> Knight.\]
>
> "Oh, that's the name of the song, is it?" Alice said, trying to feel
> interested.
>
> "No, you don't understand," the Knight said, looking a little vexed.
> "That's what the name is called. The name really is 'The Aged, Aged
> Man.'"
>
> "Then I ought to have said 'That's what the song is called'?" Alice
> corrected herself.
>
> "No you oughtn't: that's another thing. The song is called 'Ways and
> Means' but that's only what it's *called*, you know!"
>
> "Well, what is the song then?" said Alice, who was by this time
> completely bewildered.
>
> "I was coming to that," the Knight said. "The song really is
> 'A-sitting On a Gate': and the tune's my own invention."
>
> -- From Alice Through The Looking Glass, by Lewis Carroll

#### [Two types of type]{#Two_types_of_type}

Perl 6 draws an important distinction between 'variable type' and 'value
type'. A variable is a binding between a name and a container. The
variable type is the type of the container associated with the
variable's name. A variable's 'value type' is the expected type of the
value stored in the variable's container. As far as I can tell, Perl is
weirder than the average programming language in this respect in that it
allows the programmer to specify both sorts of type. In C for instance,
a value doesn't know its own type, it's just an area of memory that is
interpreted according to the type of the variable that it is accessed
via (or according to the type it is cast into). Meanwhile, in lisp like
languages, 'variables' are simply keys in a symbol table, and the values
in that symbol table are untyped pointers to values which know their own
type.

Perl 6's symbol tables are rather more like Lisp symbol tables than C's,
with the added wrinkle that the symbol table values are rather more
sophisticated containers than simple generic pointers. This complexity
arises for a couple of reasons:

[Tied variables.]{#Tied_variables.}

:   Instead of storing a variable's value in one of the core container
    types (Array, Hash, Scalar), it can be useful to use a custom
    container type to allow for 'magical' behaviour:

            my $FTSE is ShareIndex('FTSE');
            print "$FTSE";
            # FTSE 100 Index: 3916.70 (+27.50/+0.7%) at 2003042216:40

[Context]{#Context}
:   Context is really important to Perl. If you look at an array
    variable in a numeric context, then you get the number of items in
    the array; in list context, a list of all the items in the array; in
    a scalar context, a pointer to the array. This context dependent
    behaviour is best handled by the container object, possibly with the
    assistance of the contained object, but not always.

Scalars turn out to be one of the more remarkable types of Perl
containers. At their simplest they can be thought of as a container
which can hold at most one 'atomic' thing. Perl 5 scalars have three(?)
slots for Number, String and Reference values (On IRC, Dan tells me that
Perl 6 scalars will probably have slots for String, Float, Integer,
Boolean and Reference values). These different 'scalar value types' can,
with certain restrictions be treated without regard to their 'actual'
type: A Number in a string context will give a sensible string
representation, a string in a number context will give an appropriate
numeric value, but not every possible scalar value type can be sensibly
viewed as any other type; if you try and use a number in a reference
context, you're going to get an error for instance. For added fun, it's
perfectly possible for a scalar variable to contain both a Number value
and a String value (In Perl 5, [Scalar::Util](TODO) provides a nice
interface to this preexisting capability. On IRC, Dan suggests that the
Perl 6ish way of doing this will probably be
`my $i = 4 but "Bibble!";`).

#### [What are value type declarations for?]{#What_are_value_type_declarations_for?}

Some people see value type declarations as being important for
programmer safety. They want to see a situation where:

        my Number $foo = some_function_returning_a_string();

or

        sub a_func (Number $param) { ... }

        a_func("A string");

will throw exceptions, preferably at compile time.

Others want to see those same code fragments coerce any values assigned
to them into the appropriate types (possibly with a warning) and see
value type declarations simply as a way of letting the compiler do
automatic optimization of code (if you have declared that a given
variable will only contain, say, a number, you can (at least) get rid of
a layer of indirection in accessing that value).

Others don't really care one way or the other about whether or not to
coerce, they just want to use value types in setting up multimethods.

Still others don't really like the idea of declaring types at all, but
do see value in ML like type inference for programmer safety reasons...

Others want to let the programmer choose, and worry about how to
implement something which will let that happen. I'm a 'let the
programmer choose, and the compiler optimize what it can' kind of guy.

#### [Are types the same as objects?]{#Are_types_the_same_as_objects?}

If types are the same as objects, do they all inherit from a common base
class? If they do, what does the hierarchy look like? What about
interfaces? Do they need to be explicitly declared or can they be
inferred. If they can be inferred, what about the problem of:

        class Tree {
            method feed {...}
            method grow {...}
            method bark {...}
            ...
        }

        interface Canine {
            method feed {...}
            method grow {...}
            method bark {...}
        }

        class Borzoi {
            method feed {...}
            method grow {...}
            method bark {...}
        }

        ...

        multi treat($vet, Canine $critter ) {...}
        
        treat($some_vet, Tree.new); # Should this fail?

Arrghh!!! Make the hurting stop!

However, I don't care what Dan says, I want every type to have an
associated class, and I want them all to inherit from some sort of
common base class (at least conceptually, and, if I'm prepared to take
the performance hit and jump through the hoops, actually. Sometimes you
need to override Scalar's behaviour (or whatever)) but I don't think the
inheritance trees that have been bandied about so far even come close to
expressing the semantics we need. Expect a longish post to Perl 6
language on this at some point. Probably with (more or less) pseudo
code.

#### [Another distinction to think about]{#Another_distinction_to_think_about}

OO theory talks about value objects and reference objects. (I'm using
'object' here to try and get come conceptual distance from 'value
type'). Here's an abstract example of what I mean

        my $a = new ValueObject: value => 10;
        my $b = $a;

        $b.set_value(20);
        
        print "$a $b"; # 10 20

        my $c = new ReferenceObject: value => 10;
        my $d = $c;

        $c.set_value(20)

        print "$c $d"; # 20 20

#### [Just when you thought you understood value types...]{#Just_when_you_thought_you_understood_value_types...}

Along come compound value types to mess with your head. Assuming a
strict interpretation of value type declarations (assigning the the
'wrong' type to a variable throws an error), consider the following:

        my @a of Int = (1, 2, 3);
        my @b = @a;
        my @c of Str;

What happens to each of the following? If it's an error does it happen
at runtime or compile time?

        @c = @a;
        @c = @b;

        push @a, "String";
        push @b, "String";

Are you sure about those? Now, what happens if you start with:

        my @a of Int = (1 .. Inf);
        my @b = @a;
        my @c of Str;

And there's more thorny problems where they came from.

#### [Those thread links]{#Those_thread_links}

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200304140058.h3E0wlpa001034@bruce.csse.monash.edu.au)
-- Types of literals

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=20030411204244.GG561@wall.org)
-- Do we really need the dual type system

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=200304142143.11432.afaus@corp.vlex.com)
-- User defined hierarchical types

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=a05210606bac48f32d796@%5B63.120.19.221%5D)
-- Mind the difference between value types and reference types

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=ygcof343oc6.fsf@babylonia.flatirons.org)
-- Static typing with Interfaces

[http://groups.google.com/groups](http://groups.google.com/groups?threadm=001D81EE-71D1-11D7-BA15-00050245244A@cognitivity.com)
-- Michael Lazzaro's superb summary of how containers and values
interact. Not sure it's the whole story though...

### [Acknowledgements, Announcements and Apologies]{#Acknowledgements,_Announcements_and_Apologies}

Sorry it's late. I blame the perl6-language people. It has nothing
whatsoever to do with weekend spent in Wales and a Bank Holiday Monday
spent at an Easter egg hunt and barbecue at my aunt's.

This has been one of the harder Perl 6 summaries to write, mostly
because the language list has been dealing with a complicated subject
and finding lots of interesting corners and ambiguities. Many thanks to
Michael Lazzaro for his careful summation of his understanding of how
things work which certainly clarified my thinking, to Stéphane Payrard
for his sanity check of the types summary and to Dan Sugalski for a few
answers on IRC about Scalar behaviour.

If you've appreciated this summary, please consider one or more of the
following options:

-   Send money to the Perl Foundation at
    <http://donate.perl-foundation.org/> and help support the ongoing
    development of Perl.
-   Get involved in the Perl 6 process. The mailing lists are open to
    all. <http://dev.perl.org/perl6/> and <http://www.parrotcode.org/>
    are good starting points with links to the appropriate mailing
    lists.
-   Send feedback, flames, money, photographic and writing commissions,
    or a full set of Bertrand Harris Bronson's *The Traditional Tunes of
    the Child Ballads* to <p6summarizer@bofh.org.uk>


