{
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "Email",
   "tags" : [
      "spam-vipul-s-spamassassin"
   ],
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "2002-03-06T00:00:00-08:00",
   "slug" : "/pub/2002/03/06/spam.html",
   "title" : "Stopping Spam with SpamAssassin",
   "authors" : [
      "simon-cozens"
   ],
   "thumbnail" : "/images/_pub_2002_03_06_spam/111-spam.gif",
   "description" : " I receive a lot of spam; an absolute massive bucket load of spam. I received more than 100 pieces of spam in the first three days of this month. I receive so much spam that Hormel Foods sends trucks..."
}





I receive a lot of spam; an absolute massive bucket load of spam. I
received more than 100 pieces of spam in the first three days of this
month. I receive so much spam that [Hormel Foods](http://www.spam.com/)
sends trucks to take it away. And I'm convinced that things are getting
worse. We're all being bombarded with junk mail more than ever these
days.

Well, a couple of days ago, I reached my breaking point, and decided
that the [simple mail filtering](/pub/a/2001/07/17/mailfiltering.html) I
had in place up until now just wasn't up to the job. It was time to call
in an assassin.

### SpamAssassin

[SpamAssassin](http://www.spamassassin.org) is a rule-based spam
identification tool. It's written in Perl, and there are several ways of
using it: You can call a client program, `spamassassin`, and have it
determine whether a given message is likely to be spam; you can do
essentially the same thing but use a client/server approach so that your
client isn't always loading and parsing the rules each time mail comes;
or, finally, you can use a Perl module interface to filter spam from a
Perl program.

SpamAssassin is extremely configurable; you can select which rules you
want to use, change the way the rules contribute to a piece of mail's
"spam score," and add your own rules. We'll look at some of these
features later in the article. First, how do we get SpamAssassin
installed and start using it?

If you're using Debian Linux or one of the BSDs, then this couldn't be
easier: just install the appropriate package using `apt` or the ports
tree respectively. (The BSD port is called `p5-Mail-SpamAssassin`)

Those less fortunate will have to
[download](http://www.spamassassin.org/released/Mail-SpamAssassin-2.11.tar.gz)
the latest version of SpamAssassin, and install it themselves.

### Vipul's Razor

SpamAssassin uses a variety of ways for testing whether an e-mail is
spam, ranging from simple textual checks on the headers or body and
detecting missing or misleading headers to network-based checks such as
[relay blackhole lists](http://www.orbz.org) and an interesting
distributed system called [Vipul's
Razor](http://razor.sourceforge.net/).

Vipul's Razor takes advantage of the fact that spam is, by its nature,
distributed in bulk. Hence, a lot of the spam that you see, I'm also
going to see at some point. If there were a big clearing-house where you
could report spam and I could see if my incoming mail matches what
you've already reported, then I could have a guaranteed way of
determining whether a given mail is spam. Vipul's Razor is that
clearing-house.

Why is it a Razor? Because it's a collaborative system, its strength is
directly derived from the quality of its database, which comes back to
the way it's used by the likes of you and me. If end-users report lots
of real spam, the Razor gets better; if the database gets "poisoned" by
lots of false or misleading reports, then the efficiency of the whole
system drops.

Just like any other spam detection mechanism, Razor isn't perfect. There
are two points particularly worth noting. First, while it tries to
completely avoid false positives (saying something's spam when it isn't)
by requiring that spam be reported, it doesn't do anything about false
negatives (saying something's not spam when it is) because it only knows
about the mail in its database.

Second, spammers, like all other primitive organisms, are constantly
evolving. Vipul's Razor only works for spam that is delivered in bulk
without modification. Spam that is "personalized" by the addition of
random spaces, letters or the name of the recipient, will produce a
different signature that won't match similar spam messages in the Razor
database.

Nevertheless, the Razor is an excellent addition to the spam fighter's
arsenal, since when it marks something as spam, you can be almost
positive it's correct. And just like SpamAssassin, it's all pure Perl.
`Mail::Audit` has long supported a Razor plugin, but now we can move to
calling Razor as part of a more comprehensive mail filtering system
based on SpamAssasin and `Mail::Audit`

Installing Vipul's Razor is similar to installing SpamAssassin. Debian
and BSD users have packages called "razor" and "razor-clients,"
respectively; and the rest of the world can download and install from
the [home page](http://razor.sourceforge.net). SpamAssassin will detect
whether Razor is available and, by default, use it if so.

### Assassinating Spam With Mail::Audit : The Easy Way

So this is the part you've all been waiting for. How do we use these
things to trap spam? For those of you who aren't familiar with
`Mail::Audit`, the idea is simple: just like with `procmail`, you write
recipes that determine what happens to your mail. However, in the case
of `Mail::Audit`, you specify the recipe in Perl. For instance, here's a
recipe to move all mail sent to `perl5-porters@perl.org` to another
folder:

        use Mail::Audit;
        my $mail = Mail::Audit->new();
        if ($mail->from =~ /perl5-porters\@perl.org/) {
            $mail->accept("p5p");
        }
        $mail->accept();

For more details on how to construct mail filters with `Mail::Audit`,
see my [previous article](/pub/a/2001/07/17/mailfiltering.html).
Plugging SpamAssassin into your filters couldn't be simpler. First of
all, you absolutely need the latest version of `Mail::Audit`, version
2.1 from [CPAN](http://www.cpan.org/authors/id/S/SI/SIMON/). Nothing
earlier will do! Now write a filter like this:

        use Mail::Audit;
        use Mail::SpamAssassin;
        my $mail = Mail::Audit->new();

        ... the rest of your rules here ...

        my $spamtest = Mail::SpamAssassin->new();
        my $status = $spamtest->check($mail);

        if ($status->is_spam ()) {
            $status->rewrite_mail() };
            $mail->accept("spam");
        }
        $mail->accept();

As you might be able to guess, the important thing here is the calls to
`check` and `is_spam`. `check` produces a "status object" that we can
query and use to manipulate the e-mail. `is_spam` tells us whether the
mail has exceeded the number of "spam points" required to flag an e-mail
as spam.
The `rewrite_mail` method adds some headers and rewrites the subject
line to include the distinctive string "\*\*\*\*\*SPAM\*\*\*\*\*\*". The
additional headers explain why the e-mail was flagged as spam. For
instance:

    X-Spam-Status: Yes, hits=6.1 required=5.0 
    tests=SUBJ_HAS_Q_MARK,REPLY_TO_EMPTY,SUBJ_ENDS_IN_Q_MARK version=2.1

This message had a question mark in the subject, an empty reply-to, and
the subject ended in a question mark. The mail wasn't actually spam, but
this goes to prove that the technique isn't perfect. Nevertheless, since
installing the spam filter, I've only seen about 10 false positives, and
zero false negatives. I'm happy enough with this solution.
One important point to remember, however, is where in the course of your
filtering you should call SpamAssassin's checks. For instance, you want
to do so after your mailing list filtering, because mail sent to mailing
lists may have munged headers that might confuse SpamAssassin. However,
this means that spam sent to mailing lists might slip through the net.
Experiment, and find the best solution for your own e-mail patterns.

### Assassinating Spam Without Mail::Audit

Of course, there are times when it might not be suitable to use
`Mail::Audit` or you may not want to. Since SpamAssassin is provided as
a command line tool as well as a set of Perl modules, it's easy enough
to integrate it in whatever mail filtering solution you use.

For instance, here's a procmail recipe that calls out to `spamassassin`
to filter out spam:

    :0fw
    | spamassassin -P

    :0:
    * ^X-Spam-Status: Yes
    spambox

For the speed-conscious, you can run the `spamd` daemon and replace
calls to `spamassassin` with `spamc`; be aware that this is a TCP/IP
daemon that you may want to firewall from the rest of the world.
Another approach is to call `spamassassin` in your mail transport agent,
meaning that spam is filtered out before it even attempts to be
delivered to you. There's a Sendmail
[milter](http://savannah.gnu.org/projects/spamass-milt/) library
available that allows you to use SpamAssassin, and similar tricks for
Exim and other MTAs are available.

### Assassinating Spam With Mail::Audit : More Complex Operations

The `Mail::SpamAssassin` module has many other methods you can use to
manipulate e-mail. For instance, if you've identified something as
definitely being spam, then you can use

        $spamtest->report_as_spam($mail);

to report it to Vipul's Razor. (Take note of this: As we've mentioned
above, the efficiency of the Razor database comes from the fact that
e-mails in it are confirmed as spam by a human. Adding false positives
to the database would degrade its usefulness for everyone. Only submit
mail that you've confirmed personally.)
If you're finding that mail checking is taking too long because
SpamAssassin is having to contact the various network-based blacklists
and databases, then you can instruct it to only perform "local"
checking:

        $spamtest = Mail::SpamAssassin->new({local_tests_only => 1});

There is a wealth of other options available. See the
`Mail::SpamAssassin` documentation for more details, and happy
assassinating!


