{
   "tags" : [],
   "image" : null,
   "categories" : "community",
   "draft" : null,
   "date" : "2000-05-14T00:00:00-08:00",
   "title" : "This Week on p5p 2000/05/14",
   "slug" : "/pub/2000/05/p5pdigest/THISWEEK-20000514.html",
   "authors" : [
      "mark-jason-dominus"
   ],
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "description" : " Notes Regex Stress Testing Another Thread-Safing Patch Enormous perldoc discussion winds up Build patches for OS/2 Regex Engine Method calls on unblessed references Version Tuples Broken? Negative Subscripts for Tied Arrays Upcoming corrections Various Notes You can subscribe to..."
}





\
\

-   [Notes](#Notes)
-   [Regex Stress Testing](#Regex_Stress_Testing)
-   [Another Thread-Safing Patch](#Another_Thread_Safing_Patch)
-   [Enormous `perldoc` discussion winds
    up](#Enormous_perldoc_discussion_winds_up)
-   [Build patches for OS/2](#Build_patches_for_OS2)
-   [Regex Engine](#Regex_Engine)
-   [Method calls on unblessed
    references](#Method_calls_on_unblessed_references)
-   [Version Tuples Broken?](#Version_Tuples_Broken?)
-   [Negative Subscripts for Tied
    Arrays](#Negative_Subscripts_for_Tied_Arrays)
-   [Upcoming corrections](#Upcoming_corrections)
-   [Various](#Various)

### [Notes]{#Notes}

You can subscribe to an email version of this summary by sending an
empty message to
[`p5p-digest-subscribe@plover.com`.](mailto:p5p-digest-subscribe@plover.com)

Please send corrections and additions to
`mjd-perl-thisweek-YYYYMM@plover.com` where `YYYYMM` is the current year
and month.

It was tempting to just post \`nothing happened this week'. Lots of
small patches to fix various 5.6.0 misbehaviors, and reports of new
5.6.0 misbehaviors. An unusual number of people who should have known
better posting requests for dumb trivial features. Low traffic. Few big
discussions.

### [Regex Stress Testing]{#Regex_Stress_Testing}

Jarkko Hietaniemi wrote a module called `Regex::PreSuf` which accepts a
list of words and builds a regex that recognizes only those words. Mike
Giroux suggested that the large regexes generated by this module could
be used to stress-test the regex engine. (Avi Finkel's
`String::REPartition` module might be used similarly.)

Ilya said it would be better to add the trie code from `Regex::PreSuf`
to the regex engine. Jarkko replied that he would prefer to eat live
rattlesnakes.

### [Another Thread-Safing Patch]{#Another_Thread_Safing_Patch}

Dan Sugalski sent a replacement for his patch that makes the `lock()`
function thread-safe. It also exposes `lock()` functionality to XS
subroutines, and some other things.

[See the
patch.](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00352.html)

Also in thread news: A user posted a message asking why threads weren't
fully supported, and Dan replied at some length. (Summary: Because it's
hard.)

[Dan's
reply.](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00382.html)

> **Marek Rouchal:** Bottom line: I'd be very happyabout fully working
> threads in Perl 5.6.1
>
> **Dan Sugalski:**You and me both. :) I wouldn't hold my breath.
>
### [Enormous `perldoc` discussion winds up]{#Enormous_perldoc_discussion_winds_up}

As quickly as it arrived, last week's discussion of docmuentation issues
has ended. The only discussion of note this week was a message from Mark
Fisher with a reference to a 1971 paper that compared automatic indexing
with manual indexing. Would-be indexers should probably take a look at
this.

[Mark's
message.](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00387.html)

[Gerald Salton's
paper.](http://cs-tr.cs.cornell.edu/Dienst/UI/2.0/Describe/ncstrl.cornell/TR71-115)

### [Build patches for OS/2]{#Build_patches_for_OS2}

Rocco Caputo made some changes to fix the build process on OS/2.

[Read about
it.](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00357.html)

### [Regex Engine]{#Regex_Engine}

In the course of trying to investigate a bug in the regex engine, Hugo
van der Sanden critiqued the code style and comments. This led to a
brief but interesting discussion about the code there.

[Original bug
report](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00271.html)

[Hugo's critique
message](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/2000-05/msg00362.html)

### [Method calls on unblessed references]{#Method_calls_on_unblessed_references}

John Tobey submitted a patch to enable

            $r->method(arg, ...)

when `$r` is unblessed. If I understand correctly, the method is looked
up in a package named `HASH` or `ARRAY` or whatever.

Randal said that this had come up some years ago, and the consensus was
not to do it, since it would make erroneous method calls harder to
catch.

I was not able to find this discussion. John found a 1996 message from
Tim Bunce that referred to an even earlier discussion of this same idea.
(Tim submitted a patch similar to John's.) If anyone can dig up a
pointer to the original discussion, please let me know.

[Tim's really old
message.](http://www.xray.mpe.mpg.de/mailing-lists/perl5-porters/9607/msg00750.html)

### [Version Tuples Broken?]{#Version_Tuples_Broken?}

Ian Phillipps pointed out two problems with version tuples. But Ilya
said that no, the problem was not with the tuples, but with the results
produced by the `unpack` and `print` functions when extracting the
result. Mike Guy then pointed out that

            (256.255.254 . 257.258.259) eq (256.255.254.257.258.259)

is *false*.

Sarathy said that this is because `eq` is broken; it'll be fixed in
5.6.1.

### [Negative Subscripts for Tied Arrays]{#Negative_Subscripts_for_Tied_Arrays}

Michael Schwern complained that if you have a tied array, and you do

            $array[-1]

Perl does not call `$o->FETCH(-1)`, but rather instead it calls
`$o->FETCHSIZE()` to find out how long the array is, say 80 elements,
and then invokes `$o->FETCH(79)` to get the last element. Nick
Ing-Simmons, the author of the tied array implementation, said that that
was how it was supposed to work, and changing it will break existing
code.

### [Upcoming corrections]{#Upcoming_corrections}

Brad Appleton, the author of the `Pod::Parser` module suite, felt that
some of my comments from the previous report were unfair. In particular,
he says that the current `Pod::Parser` implementation is incomplete, was
designed for flexibility rather than speed, and he is sure that large
speed gains could be easily had. Brad is preparing a long and
informative reply, which I expect to include in next week's report.

### [Various]{#Various}

A large collection of bug reports, bug fixes, non-bug reports,
questions, answers, and a small amaount of flamage and spam.

Until next week I remain, your humble and obedient servant,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Mark-Jason Dominus](mailto:mjd-perl-thisweek-200005+@plover.com)


