{
   "slug" : "/pub/2001/02/14/p6p",
   "tags" : [
      "p6p",
      "perl-6"
   ],
   "date" : "2001-02-14T00:00:00-08:00",
   "draft" : null,
   "image" : null,
   "authors" : [
      "simon-cozens",
      "schuyler-erle"
   ],
   "thumbnail" : null,
   "categories" : "perl-6",
   "description" : " \"What *is* going on over there, anyway? It is unfortunately true that the effort looks stalled from the outside.\" &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;- Eric S. Raymond, to the perl6-meta mailing list The push towards the next major version of perl started with...",
   "title" : "Perl 6 Alive and Well! Introducing the perl6-mailing-lists Digest"
}





\
> *"What \*is\* going on over there, anyway? It is unfortunately true
> that the effort looks stalled from the outside."*\
>     - Eric S. Raymond, to the
> [perl6-meta](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-meta@perl.org/msg00622.html)
> mailing list

The push towards the next major version of perl started with a bang --
literally, thanks to Jon Orwant and his
[now-infamous](http://www.mail-archive.com/perl6-meta@perl.org/msg00409.html)
coffee-mug-tossing act. Mailing lists were set up, a flurry of RFCs were
submitted, and now, almost five months since the RFC process ended...
Quiet. What \*is\* going on with perl6, anyway?

As it stands now, the silence is mostly due to the fact a lot of the
work has gone underground. First, of course, we continue to wait eagerly
for Larry's language design, although as Larry himself [points
out](http://lwn.net/2001/features/LarryWall/), he's got his hands full
with the 361 RFCs submitted last fall. Elsewhere, work continues at a
steady murmur, especially on the `perl6-language` and `perl6-internals`
lists. In particular, the `perl6-internals` group, led by the
redoubtable Dan Sugalski, has borne some recent fruits, as discussions
have started to coalesce into "Perl Design Documents," or PDDs.

PDDs are detailed white papers that will hopefully serve as guides when
people actually sit down to write code. So far, PDDs have been submitted
to `perl6-internals` relating to the structures of the interpreter
itself, and of `vtables`, which will be used to implement primitive
variables, like scalars. More PDDs are expected on other
language-independent features, like garbage collection and I/O
abstraction, which will need to be implemented somehow, regardless of
what Larry's final language design looks like. Some preliminary code for
the perl6 interpreter might even be written in the next month or so,
once the existing PDDs are finalized.

So, contrary to all outward appearances, perl6 is indeed alive and well!
In order to remedy this information deficit, Simon Cozens has stepped
forward, and volunteered a companion to his perl5-porters digest. As
such, the O'Reilly Network is pleased to introduce the first edition of
the **perl6 mailing lists digest**. Simon plans to set up e-mail
distribution (analogous to the p5p digest), so we'll be sure to let you
know when that happens. Meanwhile, the perl6 digest will become a
regular weekly feature of www.perl.com, hot off the mailing lists to
you. Enjoy!

This week on perl6 (04--11 Feb 2001)
------------------------------------

Please send corrections and additions to
`perl6-thisweek-YYYYMM@simon-cozens.org` where `YYYYMM` is the current
year and month.

This week was reasonably quiet, seeing around 350 messages in all the
groups. For a change, most of the traffic was on `perl6-language`

### [Autoloading Modules]{#Autoloading_Modules}

Last week, Dan asked people to think about ways to autoload modules when
a function was used; the idea being that you'd be able to say, for
instance:

        socket(SOCK, PF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, $proto);

(or moral equivalent) and Perl would load in all the socket functions.
This is actually what Perl 5 already does for `glob` and some of the
Unicode functionality. Some people went off on a bit of a tangent and
started discussing ways to autoload modules more generally, by having
modules declare what functionality they're providing.

One big question for both sub-discussions was how we key the functions
to code. Jarkko said:

> A gut feeling that I have is we can't simply go by interface 'names',
> be they just simple names of funtions/methods or their full
> 'signatures' (let us not even start on (1) how difficult with Perl's
> type system and functions it is to define signatures (2) the
> difficulty in defining an ontology/vocabulary), either would not
> really be enough.
>
> What I think is needed is some sort of opaque tag: the name of the
> 'contract' the API claims to fulfill. The name can be the name of the
> standard, the name of the company, the name of the individual.

Branden suggested that a URI should be used, leading to the inevitable
but still horribly scary notion of

        use autoload { Bar => 'http://www.cpan.org/modules/Bar' },
                     { Baz => 'ftp://my.local.domain/perl-modules/Baz', VERSION
                     => 2 };

Various people pointed out that this might not be secure.

### [Packaging]{#Packaging}

The autoloaded core functions idea got slightly left by the wayside, as
the discussion finally veered off onto how to package up modules and
programs to satisfy dependencies and make things easy for the user. A
setup similar to Java's "jar"s was suggested. Dan came up with the very
simple and neat idea of simply shipping a bytecode compiled version of a
program instead. Schwern was a bit concerned that this would lose source
code and would separate out documentation; Dan's brilliant answer was:

> Not unless you strip the bytecode. I want to optionally package the
> source in the bytecode, since otherwise you can't do some
> optimizations after the fact on the generated bytecode stream.

He also suggested a text segment in bytecode so that, for instance, you
can still get POD embedded in code.

That's something that may well happen anyway, but Branden came back on
the packaging issue. He noted that Dan's suggestion wouldn't help for
modules with C extensions, and also said:

> Actually, I think the archive approach is more general, because it
> wouldn't have this kind of problems and would allow other resources to
> be deployed together with the code, like documentation, perhaps even
> text files and images used by a Perl/Tk application

Comparisons were made between this and the currently-existing PPM.
Branden produced a [draft
PDD](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg05694.html)
for his ideas.

### [Vtables]{#Vtables}

At long last, Dan produced the second PDD, specifying [the vtable
API](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-internals@perl.org/msg02305.html).
As expected, this exposed a lot of hidden confusion about what vtables
are for and how they're going to be handled. Tim piped up with a few
questions and corrections, including a discussion about how string
handling is going to work, especially string encoding. Dan said he
deliberately left UTF8 off, because dealing with variable-length data is
horrid. Most people disagreed, saying that UTF32 was too big for most
people, and UTF8 was a good compromise for most data. It was generally
agreed that an abstracted string handling layer would make most of the
problem go away.

Edwin Steiner asked whether the vtable API should be made up of macros;
I pointed out that this was the road that Perl 5 went down, and look
what happened to that. Dan also said that there wouldn't be an "API" for
vtables - they're to be used by the Perl guts only.

There was still a lot of confusion as to how overloading and aliasing
would be accomplished. Branden came up with an alternative suggestion
for how to handle vtables, which seemed to be rather more high-level.
The current vtable PDD wants to make many core ops a single vtable call
if possible. There seemed to be much confusion about how the `key` field
worked, and what operation was being carried out on what. No doubt
further revisions of the PDD will clear this up. Dan also said that once
the PDD has matured a little more, he wants to start writing code for
the base classes. We're nearly there, guys

.
### [Subroutine return values]{#Subroutine_return_values}

There was a lot of light but very little heat in the continuing saga of
assigning to a magic return value variable. Some people seem to want to
do this:

        sub foo {
            foo = 10;
        }

instead of `return 10`, just like Pascal, Algol and all those other
failed, now-dead languages.

A (slightly) better suggestion was a magic variable to hold the return
value, similar to what `Parse::RecDescent` (and of course, `yacc`) does.
The names `$__` and `$^R` were suggested, but there was no consensus on
whether or not it would even be a good idea.

### [End of Scope Actions]{#End_of_Scope_Actions}

A far better idea came out when people stopped looking at what they
wanted and started looking at why they wanted it. A lot of the value in
having a assignable return value is in the situation of subroutines
which set something up, compute, and then turn it down again. Another
way of looking at that was to stipulate a block executed at the end of
the scope, like this:

        sub lines {
            open IN, $_ or die $!;
            return scalar(<in>);
        }
        post lines { # This is executed on return
            close IN;
        }

Damian had, of course, thought ahead, and this is covered by his [RFC
271](http://dev.perl.org/rfc/271.html). However, he agreed that
post-block actions should be allowed everywhere, not just on
subroutines. The `always` keyword was agreed upon as a good way of doing
this, although `POST` was also suggested. This lead to the
semi-inevitable rehash of the `try`- `catch` exception handling debate.
According to John Porter,

> There is no `try`, there is only `do`. :-)

### [Garbage Collection]{#Garbage_Collection}

Jamie Zawinski published his [rant about
Java](http://www.jwz.org/doc/java.html), which caused certain sensible
people to ponder how to make sure Perl avoids the same mistakes. A few
of the things mentioned included platform independence, the size of SVs,
locking, but the discussion settled down to garbage collection, as
rather a lot of discussions on `perl6-internals` are wont to do. (Oh,
this was on `perl6-language`. Ho hum.)

The trigger was a question from Branden:

> I actually don't understand how traversing a graph can be faster than
> incrementing/decrementing/testing for zero on a refcount. I believe
> you, but I just don't understand. Could you point me to some URLs that
> talk about this?

and a masterful answer from Piers:

> There's a jolly good book on this called (would you believe) 'Garbage
> Collection'. The crux of the matter would appear to be that with
> refcounts you have to do a pretty small amount of work very, very
> often. With a well designed GC system you do a largish amount of work
> much less frequently. The total amount of work done tends to come out
> higher in the refcounting scenario.

This was coupled with a [more comprehensive
answer](http://archive.develooper.com/perl6-language@perl.org/msg05693.html)
from Ken Fox. Dan said he wanted to put GC-related data at the end of a
variable, so that it didn't always get loaded into memory. He also
pointed out that

> The less memory you chew through the faster your code will probably be
> (or at least you'll have less overhead). Reuse is generally faster and
> less resource-intensive than recycling. What's true for tin cans is
> true for memory.

and hinted that Perl 6 is likely to be using a generational semi-space
garbage collection scheme.

### [kdb]{#kdb}

Joshua Pritikin mentioned [kdb](http://www.kx.com/), but had to be
tortured before he would explain why. It eventually became clear he was
talking about the K language and its interesting data model; he says:

> Whether K is ultimately a failure or not, i find it to be an
> interesting mix of design trade-offs. Of course i'd have to use it in
> a real project to offer a detailed report of its weaknesses.

### [ESR on Perl 6]{#ESR_on_Perl_6}

Eric Raymond released two more chapters of his on-line book [The Art of
Unix Programming](http://www.tuxedo.org/~esr/writings/taoup), something
Perl 6 people would do well to read. Unfortunately, he wasn't
particularly complimentary about Perl, claiming that both Perl 5 and
Perl 6 are currently stagnant and stalled. This led to a rather
acrimonious discussion about our public image, and it was resolved that
these summaries might help us let the public know what's going on. So
here we are.

And there we were. Until next week I remain, your humble and obedient
servant,

[Simon Cozens](mailto:simon@brecon.co.uk)


