+++
canonicalUrl=""
categories="community"
date=2025-08-07T09:55:26
description="SUSE contributes $11,500 to support The Perl and Raku Foundation's critical Perl 5 Core Maintenance Fund."
draft=false
image="/images/suse-donates-to-tprf/SUSE_Logo-hor_L_Green-pos_sRGB.jpg"
thumbnail="/images/suse-donates-to-tprf/SUSE_Logo-vert_L_Green-pos_sRGB.svg"
title="SUSE Donates USD 11,500 to The Perl and Raku Foundation"
authors=[
  "olaf-alders",
]
tags=[]
+++

The Perl and Raku Foundation (TPRF) is thrilled to announce a substantial
$11,500 donation from [SUSE](https://www.suse.com/), one of the world's leading
enterprise Linux and cloud-native and AI solutions providers. This generous
contribution bolsters the Perl 5 Core Maintenance Fund and demonstrates SUSE's
commitment to the open-source ecosystem.

This donation from SUSE is actually made up of two parts. $10,000 is being
donated by SUSE LLC and an additional $1,500 is being provided by [The SUSE
Open Source Network](https://www.suse.com/sustainability/), to support the
development and sustainability of Perl. This aligns with the network's mission
to empower and support open source communities.

## Perl is a Fundamental Component of the SUSE Ecosystem

"At SUSE, Perl is a fundamental component and member of our ecosystem," explains
Miguel Pérez Colino, Director of Operations, Linux Product Management &
Marketing. "We provide it as part of our Linux offerings by actively supporting
Perl packages in SUSE Linux Enterprise and openSUSE. We use it extensively in
our toolset, powering among others OpenQA and Open Build Service, this last one
is used to build not just Linux packages but also Kubernetes."

## The Perl-Powered OpenQA and Open Build Service

SUSE's [OpenQA](https://open.qa/) project is an automated testing framework that
ensures quality across countless hardware configurations and software
combinations. At its heart is Perl, orchestrating complex test scenarios with
the reliability that system administrators have come to expect.

Similarly, [Open Build Service](https://openbuildservice.org/) is running on
many services written in Perl. represents the modern evolution of package
management, creating not just traditional Linux packages but also container
images and Kubernetes distributions.

## Sustaining the Digital Commons

SUSE's donation is a demonstration of digital stewardship—the recognition that
the tools we rely upon require active investment to remain secure, efficient,
and relevant.

"We are proudly donating to The Perl and Raku Foundation (TPRF) to ensure Perl's
continued development and health, which is vital to the open-source world, we
are part of, and we champion," Colino continues.

This investment addresses some critical aspects of language maintenance:

**Security Vigilance**: In an era of increasing cyber threats, timely security
patches aren't optional—they're essential. TPRF's maintenance fund ensures that
vulnerabilities can be addressed promptly, protecting countless systems worldwide.

**Performance Evolution**: Modern computing demands continue to evolve. The fund
supports ongoing optimisation efforts that keep Perl competitive in today's
performance-conscious environment.

**Platform Diversity**: As computing platforms proliferate—from traditional
servers to edge devices to cloud containers—Perl must remain compatible and
efficient across this expanding landscape.

**Community Responsiveness**: Bug reports and feature requests from the global
Perl community require careful evaluation and implementation. This fund ensures
these contributions don't languish unaddressed.

## A Partnership Model for Open Source Sustainability

SUSE's contribution represents more than financial support—it's a blueprint for
sustainable open-source stewardship. When organisations that build upon
open-source foundations reinvest in those foundations, they create a virtuous
cycle that benefits everyone. It's a recognition that the digital commons we all
depend upon flourish only through collective stewardship.
